bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 1
Upper extremity exomuscle for
shoulder abduction support
Cole Simpson, Student Member, IEEE, Bryce Huerta, Sean Sketch, Maarten Lansberg,
Elliot Hawkes, Member, IEEE, and Allison Okamura, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Assistive devices may aid motor recovery after a mccabe2015comparison, lang2015dose but rigorously test-
stroke, but access to such devices is limited. Exosuits can aid inglargedosagesinhumansisdifﬁcultduetothecommitment
human movement and may be more accessible alternatives to
required of both therapist and patient and the likelihood of
current devices, but we know little about how they might assist
interfering with standard care. Assistive devices may help pa-
post-stroke upper extremity movement. Here, we designed an
exosuit actuator to support shoulder abduction, which we call tientstoperformmoreandlongertherapieswithlesstherapist
an “exomuscle” and is based on a form of growing robot involvement.
called a pneumatic-reel actuator. We also assembled a ceiling- Assistive devices can be designed to aid patients in a
mounted support for a positive control. We veriﬁed that both
number of ways; one promising approach is to compensate
supports reduce the activity of shoulder abductor muscles and
for the effects of gravity. Compensating for gravity has
do not impede range of motion in healthy participants (n=4).
Then,wemeasuredreachableworkspaceareainstrokesurvivors been shown to increase stroke survivors’ reachable workspace
(n=6) with both supports and without support. Our exomuscle sukal2007shoulder theoretically increasing the number of
increased workspace area in four participants (180±90 cm2) tasks that can be performed. The relationship between gravity
while the ceiling support increased workspace area in ﬁve par-
compensation and increased reachable workspace is attributed
ticipants(792±540cm2).Designdecisionsthatreduceexomuscle
to abnormal ﬂexor synergy activation, in which stroke sur-
complexity,suchas leavingtheforearmfree, likelycontributeto
performancedifferencesbetweenthetwosupports.Heterogeneity vivors lose the ability to independently control the shoul-
amongst stroke survivors’ abilities likely contribute to high der abductor and elbow ﬂexor muscles cheung2012muscle,
variability in our results. Though both supports performed dewald2001abnormal Unloadingtheshoulderabductormus-
similarly for healthy participants, performance differences in
cles by providing gravity compensation reduces activity in
stroke survivors highlight the need to validate assistive devices
the elbow ﬂexor muscles, increasing elbow range of mo-
in the target population.
tion beer2007impact This gravity compensation strategy
Index Terms—Exosuit, stroke, assistance, workspace, ﬂexor
has been used in an eight-week therapy in which support
synergy.
was gradually removed, and motor improvements were found
ellis2009progressive, ellis2007act Because of the simplicity
I. INTRODUCTION and effectiveness of this approach, gravity compensation or
shoulder abduction support is the goal of many assistive
Stroke, the death of brain tissue due to interrupted
devices.
blood supply, is the leading cause of adult disability
Exoskeletal robots, which use motors and rigid linkages
Mozaffarian2015 While the typical stroke survivor regains
to transmit forces to the user, have been used extensively in
about 70% of lost motor function prabhakaran2008inter,
research applications ellis2007act, sukal2007shoulder How-
zarahn2011prediction, winters2015generalizability stroke
ever, widespread adoption of rehabilitation exoskeletal robots
remains the most common cause of adult disability in the
by practicing healthcare providers has not yet taken place.
United States ovbiagele2011stroke Due to aging popu-
Some commercially produced passive exoskeletal devices,
lations and changing lifestyles, the incidence and impact
which use stored potential energy to compensate for gravity,
of stroke is expected to increase. Post-stroke permanent
are used in the clinic. Examples of such devices include the
disability might be reduced by increasing therapy dosage
HocomaArmeoSpringandtheSaeboMAS.Thesecommercial
devices are rarely used outside the clinic. One key factor
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbyStanford’sStrokeCollaborativeAction
limiting adoption may be that existing devices are too ex-
Network, the Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute at Stanford University, the
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program, and pensive and complex to operate. Much cost and complexity
NationalScienceFoundationgrants1637446and1830163. stems from safety considerations such as aligning robot and
C. Simpson, B. Huerta, and A. Okamura are with the Department of
operator joints schiele2009inﬂuence compensating for the
MechanicalEngineering,StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA94035USA.(e-
mail:cssimps@stanford.edu;bhuerta@stanford.edu;aokamura@stanford.edu) additional mass of the robot, and ensuring stable interactions
S. Sketch is with Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94086, USA (e- with users duchaine2008investigation, kazerooni1995case
mail:sean.sketch@intusurg.com
These devices are limited by the workspace of the device,
M. Lansberg is with the Department of Neurology and Neurological
Sciences at Stanford University Medical Center, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA whichisusuallygroundedtoatable,theﬂoor,orawheelchair.
(e-mail:lansberg@stanford.edu) Wearable devices, grounded to the body instead of the envi-
E. Hawkes is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Univer-
ronment,maydiversifythecontextsinwhichassistivedevices
sity of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA (e-mail:
ewhawkes@engineering.ucsb.edu) can used.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 2
Soft exosuits can address many challenges associated A. exomuscle B. ceiling support
with traditional exoskeletal robots. While exoskeletal
robots use rigid linkages to generate reaction forces,
exosuits forgo rigid linkages, relying instead on the user’s
skeleton for that purpose asbeck2014stronger Doing so
removes components and therefore mass from the system,
allowing exosuits to be constructed of primarily compliant
materials that are lightweight, inexpensive, and require
less precise manufacturing. While early exosuit designs
focused on assisting with locomotion asbeck2014stronger,
lee2017reducing, awad2017soft several recent examples
actuate the upper extremity polygerinos2013towards, Fig. 1. User with (A) an exomuscle and (B) a ceiling support. A. The
exomuscle is the experimental device in this study. Its design is based on
realmuto2019robotic Speciﬁcally, exosuits have been
a type of growing robot hawkes2017soft called a pneumatic-reel actuator
created to assist with arm movements in stroke survivors hammond2017pneumatic B.Theceilingsupportisusedasapositivecontrol
simpson2017exomuscle, oguntosin2015development, inthisstudy.
natividad2016development,oneill2017soft,lessard2018soft,
natividad2018exosleeve, tiseni2019edge In particular,
tion. We also constructed a ceiling-mounted support for use
severalofthesestudieshaveexaminedhowexosuituseaffects
as a positive control. These two devices are shown in Fig. 1.
muscular activity in healthy users and whether the exosuit
limitstheuser’srangeofmotionnatividad2016development,
A. Exomuscle design – experimental device
simpson2017exomuscle, oneill2017soft, tiseni2019edge
Only one recent study has examined the effects of an Exosuits are frequently made using multiple
upper extremity exosuit on stroke survivors. In that study, actuators that apply compressive loads on the
exosuit use increased shoulder abduction and ﬂexion range of user’s joints wehner2013lightweight, mao2011cable,
motion, the degrees of freedom supported by their exosuit, brackbill2009dynamics However, in early pilot testing,
in ﬁve stroke survivors oneill2020inﬂatable O’Neill et al. we determined that the forces required to fully support the
oneill2020inﬂatable do not investigate whether unsupported weightofthearmwithoutstandoffsresultedinuncomfortably
degrees of freedom, such as the elbow, beneﬁt from exosuit high compressive loads on the shoulder. Rather than adding
assistance of shoulder abduction support as suggested by standoffs that might catch on objects in the environment
previous studies of gravity compensation after stroke. No to reduce these loads, we designed our device to push the
validations in healthy users were reported in that study. arm from beneath rather than pull from above. Additionally,
Here, we design and build a novel inﬂatable actuator for because our device comprises a single actuator rather than a
shoulder abduction support, analogous to gravity compensa- suit of actuators, we refer to it as an “exomuscle” rather than
tion(Fig.1A).Weshowinhealthyparticipantsthatthedevice an “exosuit.”
does not impede range of motion and supports the anterior In Simpson et al. simpson2017exomuscle we described
and medial components of the deltoid muscles in abducting a compliant inexpensive wearable exomuscle with a single
the shoulder, previously shown to be related to post-stroke controlleddegreeoffreedomthatassistsshoulderabductionin
reachableworkspace.Wethentestinstrokesurvivorswhether healthy users without restricting motion in other joints. That
exomuscle assistance increases reachable workspace area in devicecontrolsshoulderabductionanglebymodulatingtheair
the transverse plane (orthogonal to exomuscle support), and pressure in a bladder sewn with a hinge-like seam to a chest
whether a ten-minute assisted therapy session changes reach- harness and resting under the arm. That device is effective at
able workspace area. We perform the same set of evaluations lifting the arm and supporting movement while pressurized,
using a ceiling-mounted arm support for a positive control. but can buckle at small shoulder abduction angles/low air
We show an increase in reachable workspace area in the pressures. Here we describe a new actuator that uncouples
transverse plane in 4 out of 6 stroke survivors. Exomuscle air pressure and shoulder abduction angle.
support correlated with increased elbow range of motion, Our updated design, based on the pneumatic reel actua-
which is not supported by our exomuscle. Although the tors developed by Hammond et al. hammond2017pneumatic
ceiling-mounted support and exomuscle produced the same consists of a plastic bladder reinforced by a fabric tube sewn
resultsinhealthyparticipants,weshowthattheyproducevery out of thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)-coated polyester
different outcomes in stroke survivors, highlighting the need cloth. The fabric reinforced tube is then wrapped around an
to validate assistive devices in the target population. axle mounted to the base assembly shown in Fig. 2. In this
study, we use a locking disk and pin to ﬁx the shoulder
abduction angle so that the elbow rests at shoulder height.
II. SHOULDERABDUCTIONSUPPORTDEVICEDESIGN
For active length control, the lock disk can be replaced with
Complexity,weight,cost,andsafetyconsiderationsalllimit a transmission to a motor as described in Hammond et al.
accesstorobot-aidedtherapies.Ourgoalisthereforetocreate hammond2017pneumatic Thebaseassemblyisheldinplace
asimple,lightweight,inexpensive,wearabledevicecapableof on the wearer’s side by a waist strap and a contralateral
aiding in stroke rehabilitation by supporting shoulder abduc- shoulder strap, which supports the vertical forces required

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 3
to support the arm. Our prototype base is made out of A. Deltoid muscular effort
polyoxymethylene plastic. The supported arm is held in place
on top of the inﬂated bladder by a hook-and-loop fastener
strap. A ﬂow chart of the construction process is shown in
To determine if our exomuscle assists the user’s muscles
Fig. 2.
with shoulder abduction, we measured muscle activity in the
When completed, this exomuscle has convenient properties
shoulder muscles related to post-stroke workspace impair-
forinterfacingwithhumanoperators.Theheightofthesupport
ments while participants performed isometric and dynamic
can be adjusted without changing the air pressure by spooling
tasks. We measured muscle activity from the anterior and
and unspooling the bladder on the axle. The arm rests on
medial components of the deltoid muscle using a Delsys
the inﬂated tube, which is compliant enough at operational
Bagnoli 2 EMG system (Natick, MA, USA) read with a
air pressures of 25-50 kPa to provide a comfortable support.
National Instruments USB-600X DAQ (Austin, TX, USA) at
Additionally, extra material at the top and bottom of the
1000 Hz. In the isometric tasks, participants were asked to
inﬂated tube where it transitions from a rectangular cross
holdtheirrightarmattheheightoftheshoulder(90◦ shoulder
section (at the ends where the tube is rolled about the axle
abduction)withelbowfullyextendedforthreesecondsineach
or sewn with a straight seam) to a circular cross section
of three postures: (1) hand directly in front of the shoulder
createspivotpointsthatactasballjoints.Thesenaturalpivots
(90◦ shoulder ﬂexion), (2) hand directly out to the side (0◦
combinewithsofttissuecompliancefromthewearerresulting
shoulder ﬂexion), and (3) halfway in between those postures
in a ﬂexible support. Because the exosuit should not interfere
(45◦ shoulderﬂexion).Inthedynamictasks,participantswere
with other joints, we attach the exomuscle under the upper
asked to start in an initial posture in which the arm is raised
arm to avoid crossing the elbow joint, which would require
to the height of the shoulder (90◦ shoulder abduction), the
additional compliance about the long axis of the bladder to
elbow fully ﬂexed, and shoulder rotated such that the hand is
preserve full elbow range of motion.
directly in front of the shoulder. Participants were then asked
to reach to each of the three target postures described in the
B. Ceiling support – positive control isometric tasks (shoulder abducted 90◦, elbow fully extended,
To examine the effectiveness of the wearable exomuscle shoulder ﬂexed to 90◦, 0◦, and 45◦) before returning to the
design, we need a good-as-possible support to serve as a initial posture. Each task was demonstrated ﬁrst by the exper-
positive control for comparison. Previous studies examining imenter, participants were asked to conﬁrm they understood
the effects of gravity compensation in stroke use robotic the instructions, and the experimenter monitored performance
exoskeletons ellis2009progressive or low-friction air sleds to ofeachtasktoensurethecorrectpostureswereattained.Each
supportthearmbeer2007impact Inbothcases,theworkspace participant completed both isometric and dynamic tasks in
oftheexoskeletonortablesupportingtheairsledrequiresthat three conditions: (1) unassisted, (2) exomuscle support, and
the workspace task be broken into segments with the robot or (3)supportfromtheceilingsupportdescribedinSectionII-B.
table repositioned in the middle to complete the workspace
Electromyograms (EMG) from each muscle were high-pass
measurement. These devices also add inertia to the arm, a
ﬁltered with a cutoff frequency of 30Hz, rectiﬁed, and then
potential confound.
low-pass ﬁltered with a cutfoff frequency of 6Hz to create
Instead, we constructed a low-inertia, large workspace
linear envelopes. All ﬁlters were 8th order, zero-phase shift
sling support stienen2009freebal, essers2013inverse We
Butterworth ﬁlters (butter and ﬁltﬁlt functions in MATLAB,
suspended an arm rest from the ceiling using 165 cm of high-
Natick, MA, USA). We then computed the average muscle
strengthnylonrope.Thearmrestwasplacedundertheforearm
activation in each trial and muscle and compiled all average
as close as possible to the center of mass of the arm for
muscle activations resulting from a given support condition
eachparticipant.Wepositionedeachparticipantsuchthattheir
(unsupported,exomuscle,orideal)andtaskcondition(isomet-
elbow was directly beneath the attachment to the ceiling.
ricordynamic)intoaset.Becauseaone-sampleKolmogorov-
Smirnov test showed that the data in some sets were not nor-
III. DEVICEEFFECTSINUNIMPAIREDPOPULATION
mally distributed, we used the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis
Beforetestinginavulnerablepopulationsuchasstrokesur-
test followed by Tukey’s test to compare muscle activation
vivors, we wanted to ensure that the exomuscle produces the
across support conditions.
intendedeffectsandtestforconfoundingeffectsinunimpaired
participants. To that end, we recruited four participants with Exomuscle use reduced muscle activity by 79.5% (p =
no indicated musculoskeletal deﬁcits or injuries (3 males, 1 1.7×10−9) and 58.6% (p = 9.6×10−6) on average in the
female;age:26±4yrs;height:180±6cm;mass:72±10kg;all isometric and dynamic tasks, respectively (Fig. 3). The ideal
right-handdominant).Participantsgavetheirinformedconsent support reduced muscle activity by 83.5% (p=6.1×10−11)
inaccordancewiththepoliciesoftheStanfordInternalReview and 52.9% (p = 4.6 × 10−7) on average in the isometric
Board.Wetestediftheexomusclewasabletoofﬂoadtheeffort and dynamic tasks, respectively (Fig. 3). The average muscle
of the shoulder abductor muscles most commonly afﬁliated activity during exomuscle use was not signiﬁcantly different
with abnormal ﬂexor synergy activation. We also conducted fromthatmeasuredwhileusingtheidealsupportuseineither
a test to examine whether the exomuscle limits the range of isometricordynamictaskswithanα=0.05conﬁdencelevel.
motion of healthy users. Bothassistivedevicessupportshoulderabductionasintended.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 4
A. 12. press-fit 13. add straps and
hook and loop fastener  8. insert push-
polyurethane  front and  foam padding
(hook side) to-connect port 
bladder back plates
adhesive
6. sew backed
11. rotate 
foam
90˚about 
1. sew 2. sew  padding
long axis
w
old se 5. rotate 
3. f 4.  90˚about 
long axis
9. spool 
onto D-shaft
thread waist belt
10. thread side through slots in back plate
fabric 
braces and lock
(TPU coated polyester) 7. insert bladder disc onto shaft
C.
into fabric sleeve hook and loop 
fastener 
contralateral (loop side)
B. custom parts machined from polyoxymethylene  shoulder strap
foam padding
locking pin
back plate lock disk side brace (x2) front plate
waist belt
Fig. 2. Exomuscle design. A. The pneumatic reel exomuscle consists of two main parts, a long bladder and a base that contains the reel. The bladder is
constructedofasinglepieceofTPUcoatedpolyesterwithhookandloopfastenerssewnnearthetiptoholdthestrapthatwilllaterholdthearminplace.
The fabric is then sewn into a tube and then twisted one quarter turn around the long axis such that the hook and loop patches are on the sides. The end
of the tube is then sewn shut and a polyurethane bladder inserted. A push-to-connect port is then inserted through the ﬁrst layer of fabric and one side of
thebladdertoallowforinﬂation.B.Thebasestationisconstructedoutoffourcustompartsmachinedfrompolyoxymethylene,abackplatewithslotsfor
awaistbelt,twosidebracesthatincludeholesforashoulderstraptoattach,afrontplate,andadiskbrake.ThebladderisspooledontoaD-shaft,andthe
sidebracesanddiskbrakeareinsertedontotheendsoftheD-shaft.Shaftcollarscanbeaddedforextrastability.Thebackandfrontplatesarethenpress
ﬁt onto the notches on the side braces. Then foam padding and straps can be added as desired. C. When completed, the exomuscle base rests against the
wearer’sside,supportedbythecontralateralshoulderstrapandwaistbelt,andunderneaththeupperarm,supportedbyanotherstrap.
B. Range of motion
isometric task dynamic task
Tobeusefulinawiderangeoftasks,theexomuscleshould
p=8.2x10-9 p=3.5x10-5 notimpedethemotionoftheupperextremitywhilesupporting
p=7.2x10-7 p=8.4x10-6 shoulder abduction. To measure upper extremity range of
1 1
V) medial deltoid motion, we used motion capture (Impulse X2E, Phasespace,
m anterior deltoid San Leandro, CA, USA) to measure body kinematics at 135
y ( Hz while participants were instructed to move to the extrema
ctivit of elbow ﬂexion and shoulder ﬂexion with no assistance,
a0.5 0.5 with exomuscle support, and with the ceiling support. We
e 
cl also assessed shoulder rotation with no assistance and with
s
u exomuscle support. We did not test shoulder rotation with the
m
g.  ceilingsupportbecauseitattachesattheforearmandthusdoes
v
a not allow shoulder rotation.
0 0
u n a s sisteedx o m u s cle c eilin g u n a s sisteedx o m u s cle c eilin g anM8othtioonrdcear,ptzuerreo-dpahtaasweasshilfotwB-puattsesrwﬁoltretrhedﬁlatter20(buHtzterusainndg
ﬁltﬁlt functions in MATLAB, Natick, MA, USA). Any gaps
Fig.3. Healthyparticipantmusculareffortindifferentsupportconditions in the marker trajectories caused by temporary occlusions of
(n=4). The average anterior and medial deltoid muscle activations were
the marker were ﬁlled using cubic interpolation (interp1 func-
computed for each trial of the isometric and dynamic tasks. These were
combinedintosetsaccordingtosupporttype:unassisted,exomuscle,orceiling tion in MATLAB). We computed the elbow angle using the
support.Inbothisometricanddynamictasks,muscleactivitydecreasedwith angle between the forearm vector (vector connecting the LED
bothexomuscleandceilingsupportuse.Therewasnodifferencebetweenthe
markers placed on the lateral humeral epicondyle to the ulnar
muscle activations recorded in the two support conditions at an α = 0.05
conﬁdencelevelineithertask. epicondyle) and upper arm vector (vector from the acromion
to the lateral humeral epicondyle). We computed the shoulder

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 5
abduction assistance from our device increases post-stroke
elbow  shoulder flexion
160 reachable workspace as expected, we recruited 6 stroke sur-
s) vivors with upper extremity motor impairments. We screened
s
e participants during the recruitment process to include those
egr 120 witharmweaknesswhosestrokeoccuredmorethan6months
d
n ( before the study date and exclude those with conﬂating health
o
oti problems, sensory deﬁcits, or that experience pain during
m 80
of  passive movements of the arm. All participants gave their
e  informed consent in accordance with the policies of the
g
n
a 40 Stanford Internal Review Board. We administered the upper
nt r extremityportionoftheFugl-Meyerexamandtestedforvisual
oi
j and tactile neglect in all participants. We also administered
0
u n a s sisteedx o m u s cle c eilin g u n a s siste de x o m u s cle c eilin g t(hMeAmSa)nounalthmeubsiccleeptse,sttri(cMepMs,Ta)nadnddemltooiddisﬁoefdeAacshhwpoarrtthiciSpcaanlte.
Becauseofsafetyconcernsinliftingthearm,wealsochecked
Fig. 4. Healthy participant range of motion in different support all participants for scapulo-humeral rhythm. The results of
conditions(n=4).Inadditiontosupportingshoulderabduction,theexomuscle these assessments as well as demographic information are
is designed to minimize its impact on other upper extremity degrees of
shown in Table I. We measured the reachable workspace of
freedom. Here, we measured range of motion in the shoulder and elbow in
theunassistedcase(red),whileusinganexomuscle(blue),andwithsupport all participants in 3 support conditions: unassisted, exomuscle
fromtheceiling-mounteddevice(gray).Therangeofmotiondidnotchange support, and ceiling support. We also tested an indicator of
acrosstheconditions(p=0.97,Kruskal-Wallistest).
ﬂexor synergy activation in each condition and tested for
session effects.
ﬂexion angle as the angle between the trunk vector (vector
A. Methods
connecting the acromion with the C7 vertebrate) and the
upper arm vector. We computed the shoulder internal/external We designed our exomuscle to aid shoulder abduction and
rotation angle as the angle between the forearm vector and thus increase the reachable workspace of post-stroke users
the vertical axis of the motion capture coordinate frame. For while wearing the device. In pilot studies, however, one par-
comparisonacrossconditions,wecomputetherangeofmotion ticipant’sunassistedreachableworkspaceappearedtoincrease
as the difference between each extrema. For example, the el- immediately after a short period of exercise with exomuscle
bowrangeofmotionisthedifferencebetweenthepeakelbow support when compared to unassisted reachable workspace
ﬂexion angle and the peak elbow extension angle. We then before the exercise. Such session effects are rarely reported
grouped the ranges of motion for elbow ﬂexion/extension and mignardot2017multidirectional,huang2012augmented and
shoulder ﬂexion/extension into a single set for each support the neurophysiological mechanisms for such spontaneous re-
condition. Because a one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test covery, if they exist, could be useful to investigate. We thus
showed that the data in some of these sets were not normally designedaprotocoltonotonlyassess(1)reachableworkspace
distributed, we used the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test and (2) ﬂexor synergy activation in each support condition,
to compare range of motion across support conditions. We but also (3) whether a short period of assisted exercise could
used the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test to com- produce short-term motor improvements.
Our protocol consists of a set of assessments performed
pare shoulder internal/external rotation in the unassisted and
with each of the 3 support conditions. In each assessment,
exomusclesupportconditionsbecausetheceilingsupportdoes
the reachable workspace was measured using the protocol
not allow for this motion.
described below in Section IV-A1 and a proxy for ﬂexor
The results of the range of motion analysis are shown in
synergy activation was measured using the protocol described
Fig. 4. Neither the exomuscle nor ceiling support changed
below in Section IV-A2. Each participant completed the ﬁrst
the range of motion for shoulder ﬂexion/extension or elbow
set of assessments unassisted to get baseline measurements.
ﬂexion/extension (p = 0.97, Kruskal-Wallis). The exomuscle
Participants were then randomly assigned a support condition
did not reduce the shoulder internal/external rotation range
(exomuscle or ceiling support) and completed a trial with that
of motion (p = 0.89, Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Thus the
support condition followed by a trial with the other support
exomuscle and ceiling support do not impede the motion of
conditionasshowninFig.5.Eachtrialconsistsofaworkspace
the unsupported joints.
and ﬂexor synergy evaluation with the assigned support fol-
lowed by a ten-minute intervention trial designed to replicate
IV. DEVICEEFFECTSONPOST-STROKEMOTOR
the exercise that appeared to produce a session effect in a
PERFORMANCE
pilot study. In this intervention trial, participants performed
Our device was designed to support shoulder abduction, the same clockwise and counterclockwise circular movements
previously shown to increase the reachable workspace area in with the hand used to measure the reachable workspace (see
stroke survivors beer2007impact, sukal2007shoulder by of- Section IV-A1). The direction of the circular movements was
ﬂoading abnormal ﬂexor synergy effects cheung2012muscle, randomlydeterminedandrepeatedfor1minute.Uptothree1-
dewald2001abnormal To determine whether the shoulder minute rest periods were allowed as needed. The support was

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 6
TABLEI
STROKESURVIVORDEMOGRAPHICSANDCLINICALASSESSMENTSCORES.
ID Age Sex Dominantarm Affectedarm Yearssincestroke FMAUE MAS MMT Neglect Rhythm
1 48 M R R 3.5 36 [1+,1+,2] [2,4,4] N/N Y
2 53 M R L 3 25 [0,0,0] [5,4,4] N/N Y
3 70 M R L 11 14 [0,1,0] [2-,2-,2+] N/N Y
4 44 F R L 2 21 [0,0,2] [2-,4,2] N/N Y
5 50 F R L 1 17 [4,1+,2] [4,2+,3+] N/N Y
6 41 M R L 20 47 [0,2,0] [4,4,5] N/N Y
Abbreviations:M=male,F=female,R=right,L=left,N=no,Y=yes
FMAUE=upperextremityportionoftheFugl-Meyerassessment,MAS=modiﬁedAshworthscale,MMT=manualmuscletest
Neglect=visualandtactileneglect,Rhythm=scapulohumeralrhythm.
ScoresontheMASandMMTarepresentedintheorder:[deltoid,biceps,triceps].
Visualandtactileneglectresultsarepresentedarepresentedintheorder:visual/tactile.
then removed and participants performed another workspace for the C7 marker in all trials. Because the 20 cm threshold
and ﬂexor synergy assessment with no support to test for selected has the potential to impact the results, we performed
any effects of the exercise. Participants then rested for ten- a sensitivity analysis of this value presented in the Appendix.
minutes before performing another workspace and synergy We also computed the range of elbow and shoulder ﬂex-
assessmenttodeterminewhetheranyexerciseeffectshadworn ion/extension achieved during the workspace recordings using
off. Participants were given one more ten-minute rest before the same method described in Section III-B.
a ﬁnal assessment. Participants then completed the same set 2) Flexor synergy assessment: The increase in workspace
oftestswiththeothersupportcondition,exomuscleorceiling that normally occurs with gravity compensation is thought
support. to be due to unloading of the ﬂexor synergy. To estimate
the relative magnitude of the ﬂexor synergy effect, Ellis et
1) Workspace assessment: We followed the protocol used
al. ellis2017ﬂexion developed an experiment to approximate
to measure the reachable workspace in stroke survivors from
ﬂexor synergy activation in which the affected arm is placed
Sukal et al. sukal2007shoulder with small modiﬁcations
in a posture that activates the deltoid muscles – and thus the
to accommodate our devices and equipment. In every case,
ﬂexor synergy in those that express abnormal ﬂexor synergy
participants were instructed to individually ﬂex and extend
– while measuring the activity of the biceps muscles. We
the elbow and shoulder to trace the largest possible circle that
copied this experiment with each of our support conditions
they could reach while keeping the hand and elbow raised
by asking each participant to hold a posture for three seconds
to the height of the shoulder. In order to record the largest
in which the hand and elbow were raised to shoulder height
workspace, participants performed 6 circles per measurement,
with the hand resting in front of the shoulder and the elbow
3 in each direction with the order randomly determined, and
ﬂexed approximately 70◦ while the activity of the biceps was
werecoachedbytheexperimenterwhodemonstratedtheideal
measuredusingaDelsysBagnoli2system(Natick,MA,USA)
form throughout. In each trial, arm kinematics were recorded
read with a National Instruments USB-600X DAQ (Austin,
usingmotioncapture(ImpulseX2E,Phasespace,SanLeandro,
TX, USA) at 1000 Hz.
CA, USA) at 135 Hz with LED markers placed on the
EMG from each participant were high-pass ﬁltered with a
C7 vertebrate, acromion, clavicle, olecranon, lateral humeral
cutoff frequency of 30Hz, rectiﬁed, and then low-pass ﬁltered
epicondyle, radial styloid, ulnar styloid, and ﬁrst knuckle.
with a cutfoff frequency of 6Hz to create linear envelopes.
Motion capture data was low-pass ﬁltered at 20 Hz using All ﬁlters were 8th order, zero-phase shift Butterworth ﬁlters
an 8th order, zero-phase shift Butterworth ﬁlter (butter.m and (butter and ﬁltﬁlt functions in MATLAB). We then computed
ﬁltﬁlt.m in MATLAB, Natick, MA, USA). Any gaps in the the average muscle activation in each trial.
marker trajectories caused by temporary occlusions (less than
0.2seconds)ofthemarkerwereﬁlledusingcubicinterpolation B. Results
(interp1functioninMATLAB).Anyocclusionslastinglonger 1) Workspace: Workspace area increased with exomuscle
than 0.2 seconds were ignored in our analyses rather than support in 4 out of 6 participants compared with 5 out of 6
interpolated to avoid generating incorrect data. We computed withceilingsupport(Fig.6).Thetwoparticipantswhodidnot
the reachable workspace of the hand using the boundary increase in workspace with exomuscle support were the two
function in Matlab, which computes a concave boundary participants with the largest baseline workspace area (S2 and
around the input data and computes the area of that boundary. S6, Fig. 6). Only participant 4 did not increase in workspace
However, because the original task described by Sukal et al. area with ceiling support. This participant also exhibited the
sukal2007shoulder requiredthatthearmremainattheheight most fatigue and spasticity effects. Note that we present the
of the shoulder throughout the experiment, we disregarded workspace area change relative both to the baseline measure-
datapoints in which the hand (deﬁned as the marker on the ment and relative to the previous unassisted trial in Fig. 6B.
ulnar epicondyle) or elbow (deﬁned as the marker on the Wediscussthecomparisonagainstthepreviousunassistedtrial
lateralhumeralepicondyle)fellbelow20cmbelowtheheight here because it is likely the more accurate measurement due
of the shoulder (deﬁned as the marker on the acromion). Due to the effects of fatigue and spasticity discussed in Section
toocclusionsinsomeparticipants,wesubstitutedtheacromion IV-B3.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 7
UNA = unassisted assessment EXO = exomuscle assessment CEIL = ceiling assessment
exomuscle ceiling
3 participants EXO assisted exercise UNA rest UNA  rest UNA CEIL assisted exercise UNA rest UNA  rest UNA
UNA
3 participants CEIL assistceedi lienxgercise UNA rest UNA  rest UNA EXO asseisxtoemd uesxcelrecise UNA rest UNA  rest UNA
Fig.5. Experimentalprotocolfollowedbystrokesurvivors.Participantsperformedabaselineassessmentwithoutsupportfromeithertestdevice.Participants
werethenrandomlyassignedtousetheexomuscleorceilingsupportﬁrst.Theyperformedanassessmentwiththatsupportfollowedbya10-minutesupported
exercise.Follow-upassessmentspunctuatedby10-minuterestswereperformedaftereachexercisetogaugeresidualeffectsofdeviceuse.Participantsthen
repeated this set of tests with the other support. Each assessment consists of a workspace measurement and the recording of a proxy for ﬂexor synergy
activation.
Changes in workspace area were strongly correlated with in healthy subjects that our exomuscle reduces the activity of
changes in elbow range-of-motion (r=0.84), while shoulder shoulderabductormusclesrequiredforsupportagainstgravity
range-of-motion was weakly correlated with workspace area and implicated in reduced workspace area. We also veriﬁed
(r=0.34, Fig. 6C.), consistent with Sukal et al.’s ﬁndings that the exomuscle does not impede joint range of motion of
sukal2007shoulder the shoulder or elbow. We then measured workspace area in
2) Flexor synergy: Biceps activation during a shoulder six stroke survivors, ﬁnding an increase in workspace area
abductiontask,aproxyforﬂexorsynergyactivation,decreased in four with exomuscle support. We compared the exomuscle
in4/6and5/6participantsusingtheexomuscleandtheceiling with a ceiling support serving as a positive control, which
support, respectively. Biceps activations were weakly corre- increased workspace area in ﬁve participants. Though the
latedwithelbowrangeofmotion(r=0.31)andworkspacearea two performed similarly in healthy participants, the ceiling
(r=0.41) (Fig. 7). Though the correlations shown in Fig. 7 are support outperformed the exomuscle in every measure in
weak, they show the expected trend: that reductions in ﬂexor strokesurvivors.Thisresulthighlightstheneedtostudydevice
synergyactivationwillleadtoincreasedelbowrangeofmotion effects in the target population.
and increased reachable workspace. This correlation might
Several design factors may contribute to the difference in
be weak due to our limited ability to screen for participants
performancebetweenthetwodevicesinstrokesurvivors.Cer-
with abnormal ﬂexor synergy activation, adding noise to this
taindesignconcessionsthatweremadetomaketheexomuscle
measurement.
wearable are not necessary for the ceiling support. The most
3) Session effects: We did not see single-session increases
noticeable of these is that the ceiling support lifts the user’s
inworkspaceareaafterourintervention.Rather,wesawshort-
forearm while the exomuscle supports the wearer’s upper
term decreases in workspace related to use of the arm, likely
arm, leaving forearm support to the user. This concession
due either to fatigue or use-dependent effects of spasticity
enables exomuscle users to internally rotate the shoulder and
(Fig. 8). Workspace area decreased more after exomuscle
allows for a simpler design than would be required to support
exercise than after exercise with the ceiling support (p= 0.03,
the forearm throughout the full range of shoulder-plus-elbow
Wilcoxon rank sum), suggesting exomuscle use was more
motion.Thisconcessionmadelittledifferencetohealthyusers,
fatiguing than use of the ceiling support. Because participants
who were able to support their own forearms while exploiting
did not recover these losses in workspace area between the
theexomuscleforsupport.Strokesurvivors,ontheotherhand,
ﬁrst and third unassisted assessments (p=0.79, Wilcoxon sum
frequently needed the additional forearm support provided by
rnk), this time-dependent effect is likely to have impacted
the ceiling support to maintain the experiment posture.
our results. If we compare workspace area while using the
Stroke survivors have different levels of motor abil-
exomuscle to the previous trial in which assistance was not
ity depending on the size and location of the le-
used rather than the baseline measurement, 4/6 participants
increase in workspace by an average 180±90 cm2. sion and on treatment. Stroke survivors frequently expe-
rience a combination of sensorimotor deﬁcits including
abnormally coupled joints Dewald1995, beer2007impact,
V. DISCUSSION
dewald2001abnormal increased noise in sensing and esti-
We designed a single degree-of-freedom exosuit actuator mationCusmano2014 muscularweaknessBourbonnais1989
that we call an exomuscle to support shoulder abduction, and spasticity Watkins2002 Our exomuscle was designed
veriﬁedthatitperformsasintendedinhealthyparticipants,and to assist individuals with abnormally coupled joints in the
testeditsefﬁcacyinincreasingamotorperformancemetricin form of the ﬂexor synergy duysens2013ﬂexion Our screen-
stroke survivors. Several recent devices incorporate multiple ing procedure, however, likely failed to distinguish be-
controlled degrees of freedom to command a larger range tween individuals with an abnormal ﬂexor synergy and those
of actions in the wearer. We take the opposite approach in with muscular weakness for example. These sensorimotor
attempting to assist only a single degree of freedom shown in deﬁcits can have very different effects on motor performance
other works to be effective in improving a measure of post- sketch2017simulating whichmightexplaininpartwhysome
strokemotorcapability,reachableworkspacearea.Weveriﬁed ofourparticipantsincreasedinreachableworkspaceby130%

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 8
B. Bicep activation correlations
A. MeasurPed1 workspace for eacPh2 participant P3 bow range of motionhange from unassisted)1-5050000 r=0.31 workspace areaange from unassisted)1345050000 exomcr=eu0isli.cn4lge1
el(% c-100 -50 0 50 100 % ch -50 0 50 100
(
bicep activation  bicep activation 
(% change from unassisted) (% change from unassisted)
Fig.7. Correlationsbetweenbicepsactivationandelbowrangeofmotion
unassisted P6 and workspace area. We measured biceps muscle activation as a proxy
exomuscle for ﬂexor synergy activation ellis2017ﬂexion Changes in bicep activation
ceiling wereweaklynegativelycorrelatedwithbothelbowrangeofmotion(left)and
workspacearea(right).
P4 P5
p=0.03 p=0.79
400 400
m 2m)
c c 0 0
10  ge (
10 cm han -400 -400
c
e 
B. Measured workspace area vs. baseline measurement c
pa -800 -800
2m) 2000 ccoommppaarreedd  ttoo  pbraesveiolinues works
c exomuscle -1200 -1200
e ( ceiling
ng 1000 exomuscle ceiling first trial last trial
a
h residual residual
c
e 
ac 0 Fig. 8. Session effect on unassisted workspace area. Workspace area
sp decreasedmoreafterexercisewiththeexomusclethanwiththeceilingsupport
k
or (left, p=0.03, Wilcoxon rank sum test), suggesting that exomuscle use was
w more fatiguing than the ceiling support. Workspace area did not return to
-1000 baselineafterthetwoten-minuterestperiods(right,p=0.79,Wilcoxonrank
1000 2000 3000
sum test), suggesting that fatigue or spasticity may have played a role in
baseline workspace area (cm2) decreasingworkspacemeasurementsinthesecondhalfoftheexperiment.To
control for this, we compared workspace measurements to the most recent
C. Correlations between workspace and joint range of motion unassistedtrialinadditiontothebaselinetrialinFig.6.B.
d)
ste450 r = 0.84 r = 0.34 exomuscle
kspace areae from unassi135000 ceiling wuloshaeEidrlx’sesoosgmutehinutesesr,rcsautwdleoedhscikrcbeehyalestehtahdalevbesydyesnuvtoepimctero.igm7Iind0u%smtf.raasnumypep,coarrtseeqstuh,iertehaedsthedaittliooatnhdaesl
worhang 0 are compressive wehner2013lightweight, mao2011cable,
c brackbill2009dynamics, lessard2018soft, mao2011cable
% 
( -50 0 50 0 100 200 300 However, our device can produce tensile loads on the
elbow range of motion  shoulder range of motion  shoulder complex, which must be supported by soft tissue.
(% change from unassisted) (% change from unassisted) Some stroke survivors have difﬁculty supporting tensile
loads in the shoulder, even in unloaded scenarios, resulting
Fig.6. Strokesurvivorworkspacemeasurementswithdifferentsupport
in subluxation. Though commercial braces exist to support
conditions (n=6). A. Workspace area measured in each participant in three
supportconditions:unassisted,exomuscle,andceilingsupport.B.Workspace against subluxation in stroke survivors that could be used in
area increased for only three participants using the exomuscle (blue hollow parallel with our device, a better approach might be to design
circles) while the ceiling support increased workspace in ﬁve participants
assistive devices that either generate compressive loads on
(grayhollowcircles).Pariticpantswithsmallunassistedworkspacesreceived
more beneﬁt from both devices. Four participants increased in workspace the shoulder in a comfortable range or those that add no net
whencompensatingforfatiguebycomparingagainstthepreviousunassisted resultant force to the shoulder as in traditional exoskeletons
trial,ratherthantheﬁrst.C.Elbowrangeofmotionwasstronglycorrelated
whose frames support their own reaction forces.
withworkspacearea(r=0.84).Thiscorrelationsupportstheargumentthatthe
support devices ofﬂoad the ﬂexor synergy, which constrains elbow range of Open challenges for this device include active control
motion.Shoulderrangeofmotionwasweaklycorrelatedwithworkspacearea necessitating transparent intent recognition and onboarding
(r=0.34).
of all actuators and power sources. Simple, inﬂatable

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 9
devices such as ours still require an actuator, compressor,
power supply, controller, and sensing for transparent
untethered operation. Given that our device is meant to
compensate for gravity, a predictable force whose effects
vary only with body state, purely mechanical devices can
be designed to accomplish the same thing with 0 controlled
DOFs herder2005development, cardoso2002conceptual,
van2019design, babik2019play Such mechanisms, can
provide shoulder abduction support that varies with posture
to negate the effects of gravity on a wearer’s arm without
actuators, compressors, power supplies, controllers, or
sensing. These mechanisms’ rigid frames react applied loads,
meaning that no net force is applied to the shoulder complex
that may cause discomfort in stroke survivors.
While our exomuscle is designed for the needs of stroke
survivors,otherpopulationsmightalsobeneﬁtfromsimilarde-
vices.Gravitysupportedtherapyhasshowntoimproveclinical
measures of motor ability in participants with cerebral palsy
elshamy2018efﬁcacy Gravity-compensating devices can also
provide movement beneﬁts to individuals with muscular dys-
trophy kooren2015design though most extant examples are
mounted to wheelchairs and are not wearable.
APPENDIX
A. Sensitivity to selected threshold value
Toestimatetheworkspaceareaattheheightoftheshoulder
in our experiment, we disregarded datapoints in which the
handorelbowmarkersdroppedbelowtheshouldermarkerby
threshold of 20 cm (Fig. 6). However, because this threshold
has the potential to inﬂuence our results, we perform a
parameter sweep on the value of the threshold. Our parameter
sweep shows that workspace measurements using the ceiling
support are insensitive to the selected margin, likely due to
the forearm support provided.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Mark Cutkosky for the use of the EMG system
and Cara Welker, Cara Nunez, Michael Raitor, Zonghe Chua,
andtherestoftheStanfordCHARMlabfortheirconstructive
comments and prototype design testing. We thank Marion
Buckwalter, Julie Muccini, Kara Flavin, Elizabeth Osborn,
Esther Rah, Emily Huang, Michael Sharp, and the rest of
the Stroke Collaborative Action Network (SCAN) at Stanford
University for their assistance in reﬁning the study protocol
and in recruiting participants.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.061846; this version posted July 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.
IEEETRANSACTIONSONMEDICALROBOTICSANDBIONICS 10
4000 unassisted
exomuscle
ceiling
2m)3000
c
a ( threshold value (cm)
e 5 10 15 20 25 30 >30
ar
e 2000
c
a
p
s
k
or1000
w
0
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6
participant
Fig.9. Sensitivityofworkspaceareameasurementtothethresholdvalue.Wecomputedthereachableworkspaceareausingdatainwhichthehandand
elbowwerewithinathresholdedheightoftheshoulderof20cm.Herewecomputethereachableworkspaceareafordifferentthresholdvaluesrangingfrom
5cmtoconsideringallpoints(>30cm)foreachparticipantineachsupportcondition.

NEW PAGE