bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
FH variant pathogenicity promotes purine salvage pathway dependence in kidney cancer 
 
Blake R. Wilde1, Nishma Chakraborty1^, Nedas Matulionis1^, Stephanie Hernandez1^, Daiki 
Ueno2,3, Michayla E. Gee1, Edward D. Esplin4, Karen Ouyang4, Keith Nykamp4, Brian Shuch2,5, 
Heather R. Christofk1,5,6,* 
 
1Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 
2Institute of Urologic Oncology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 
3Currently: Department of Urology, Yokosuka Kyosai Hospital 
4Invitae, San Francisco, California 
5Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 
6Broad Stem Cell Research Center, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California 
^Equal contribution 
*Corresponding author: HChristofk@mednet.ucla.edu 
 
Running Title: FH inactivity promotes purine salvage pathway dependence 
 
Keywords: GENITOURINARY CANCERS/Renal cancer, METABOLISM/Metabolic pathways, 
ENDOGENOUS RISK FACTORS/Gene polymorphisms 
 
Additional Information 
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Abstract 
The tricarboxylic citric acid cycle enzyme fumarate hydratase (FH) is a tumor suppressor. When 
lost in cells, its substrate fumarate accumulates to mM levels and drives oncogenic signaling 
and transformation. Germline alterations lead to an autosomal dominant condition known as 
hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) where patients are predisposed to 
various benign tumors and an aggressive form of kidney cancer. FH alterations of unclear 
significance are frequently observed with germline testing; thus, there is an unmet need to 
classify FH variants by their cancer-associated risk, allowing for screening, early diagnosis and 
treatment. Here we quantify catalytic efficiency of 74 FH variants of uncertain significance. Over 
half were enzymatically inactive which is strong evidence of pathogenicity. We generated a 
panel of HLRCC cell lines expressing FH variants with a range of catalytic activities, then 
correlated fumarate levels with metabolic features. We found that fumarate accumulation blocks 
purine biosynthesis, rendering FH-deficient cells reliant on purine salvage to maintain purine 
nucleotide pools. Genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of the purine salvage pathway reduced 
HLRCC tumor growth in vivo. Together, these findings suggest pathogenicity of many patient-
associated FH variants and reveal purine salvage as a targetable vulnerability in FH-deficient 
tumors.  
 
Statement of Significance 
This study functionally characterizes patient-associated FH variants with unknown significance 
for pathogenicity. This study also reveals nucleotide salvage pathways as a targetable feature of 
FH-deficient cancers, which are shown to be sensitive to the purine salvage pathway inhibitor 6-
mercaptopurine. This presents a new rapidly translatable treatment strategy for FH-deficient 
cancers. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Main 
Fumarate hydratase (FH) catalyzes the reversible hydration of fumarate to L-malate in 
the tricarboxylic citric acid cycle (TCA). Germline inactivating mutations in FH are associated 
with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC), a condition that predisposes 
patients to benign uterine and cutaneous leiomyomas and a unique form of renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC) with early onset and aggressive behavior prompting lifelong screening1–3. Hereditary FH-
mutant cancers conform to Knudson’s “two-hit” model for tumorigenesis, where loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) provides a “hit”—that is, loss of the wildtype allele in combination with a 
germline inactivating mutation are initiating steps in oncogenic transformation4,5. Consistent with 
this idea, biallelic somatic mutations in FH have also been observed in histologically similar 
forms of RCC6,7. 
Sporadic or germline inactivating mutations in FH result in the accumulation of fumarate, 
a bona fide oncometabolite8. Though the mechanisms that underlie fumarate-driven 
transformation are still unknown, a combination of factors are likely necessary including: 1) 
inhibition of α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases resulting in global changes in DNA and 
histone methylation and stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factors9–11, 2) increased anabolic 
metabolism to support tumor growth12, and 3) dysregulation of signaling pathways that counter 
metabolic stress and drive proliferation8. Fumarate accumulation is also associated with broad 
metabolic rewiring, yet it remains unclear which pathway alterations are necessary to support 
tumor growth or are potential liabilities for cell stress/death in FH-deficient cancers. 
  FH alterations are more common than previously thought, with 0.6% of patients having a 
variant of unknown significance on germline testing and a possible increased prevalence of 
kidney cancer13. This highlights the need to properly classify variants according to their risk for 
kidney cancer and follow patients appropriately. Here we characterized 74 FH variants of 
uncertain significance (VUS) including some with conflicting interpretations of pathogenicity (CI), 
collectively VUS/CI. We quantified catalytic efficiencies and assessed multimerization status of 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
each variant. Nearly half were enzymatically inactive, which is strong evidence of pathogenicity. 
These results help to elucidate variant pathogenicity and serve as a catalogue for interrogating 
fumarate-dependent changes in cells. To gain insight into the metabolic consequences of 
fumarate accumulation, we investigated correlations between fumarate accumulation and 
altered metabolism in HLRCC cells. We found that FH-deficient cells do not synthesize purines 
through de novo IMP biosynthesis but instead rely on purine salvage for nucleotide 
biosynthesis, thus suggesting a potential targetable metabolic vulnerability in HLRCC-
associated kidney cancer.   
 
Results 
Patient presentation of FH variant of uncertain significance p.Met151Lys suggests pathogenicity 
  ClinVar reports information about genomic variation and pathogenicity by aggregating 
information from clinical testing laboratories. ClinVar catalogues FH genomic variants as 
associated with HLRCC and/or fumarase deficiency, which is the biallelic inheritance of loss-of-
function mutations in FH. Approximately half of all FH variants listed in ClinVar lack a clear 
interpretation of pathogenicity, and thus are VUS/CI (Fig. 1A and Supplementary Fig. S1A). 
While 71% of all HLRCC-associated FH variants are missense mutations, only 22% of those 
have been interpreted as benign or pathogenic (Supplementary Fig. S1B), leaving many 
HLRCC-associated FH missense variants classified as VUS/CI. 
  Patients with FH variants classified as VUS/CI need clarity on whether they have 
HLRCC, especially so they can begin screening for RCC during adolescence.  For example, a 
47-year old male with a family history of RCC who was not previously screened presented 
symptomatically with a large renal mass (Fig. 1B). PET/CT scanning with 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose showed a large right renal mass with tumor thrombus in the inferior vena 
cava extending just below the edge of the diaphragm (Fig. 1C). Histology showed suspicious 
HLRCC features including eosinophilic papillary architecture with classic peri-nucleolar halos 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
and prominent orangiophilic nucleoli (Fig. 1D). Immunohistochemistry showed retention of FH 
protein expression (Fig. 1E); however, 2-succinyl-cysteine (2SC) staining, a biomarker of FH-
deficient tumors, showed diffusely positive cytoplasmic and nuclear staining (Fig. 1F). These 
results are consistent with a loss-of-function mutation in FH. Genetic testing showed a 
heterozygous germline alteration in FH, p.Met151Lys. The proband’s mother, one child, and a 
niece are also carriers of FH p.Met151Lys (M151K) and have HLRCC-associated morbidities 
including fibroids and RCC (Fig. 1B). There are conflicting interpretations of pathogenicity for 
this variant, arguing that despite the strong clinical evidence of pathogenicity, this polymorphism 
should not inform clinical decision making. This case illustrates the urgent need to interpret FH 
VUS/CI for pathogenicity so family members are assessed for FH variant status, and when 
indicated, begin regular screening for kidney cancer. 
 
A catalogue of 74 HLRCC-associated FH variants 
We used biochemical analyses to classify FH-M151K and other FH VUS/CI. We 
expressed and purified recombinant FH from E. coli (Fig. 2A) and developed a spectroscopic 
assay for quantifying FH catalytic activity in the forward (hydration of fumarate) and reverse 
(dehydration of malate) directions. As expected, several variants reported as pathogenic in 
ClinVar had no quantifiable enzymatic activity (Fig. 2B). We extended this analysis to five 
VUS/CI. Three variants, pSer187Leu (S187L), p.Arg350Trp (R350W), and p.Glu376Pro 
(Q376P), were inactive in both directions (Fig. 2C). p.Pro174Arg (P174R) had a higher K  for 
m
fumarate and lower k  and catalytic efficiencies for both fumarate and malate (Fig. 2C and 
cat
Supplementary Fig. S2A-C). p.Ala70Thr (A70T) had higher K  and k  for fumarate; however, 
m cat
catalytic efficiencies for both fumarate and malate were no different than wildtype enzyme (Fig. 
2C and Supplementary Fig. S2D-F). These studies reveal strong evidence of pathogenicity for 
the inactive VUS/CI: S187L, R350W, and Q376P14. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Additional FH variants were included in our analyses if they met the following criteria: (1) 
observed in at least one patient ordering the FH test; (2) resulted in a missense change; and (3) 
had a Sherloc point score > 1.5 pathogenic points15. Thus, we extended our biochemical 
characterization to a prioritized list of 74 FH VUS/CI (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. S3-S5), 
which represents approximately half of all VUS/CI missense variants currently listed with 
interpretations in ClinVar. While k  for wildtype FH was variable across production lots, 
cat
catalytic efficiencies were stable and made up <10% of the total variation (Supplementary Fig. 
S6A-C). Thus, we quantified catalytic efficiencies for all 74 VUS/CI. Catalytic efficiencies for the 
forward and reverse reactions correlated well (Supplementary Fig. S6D-F). Importantly, nearly 
half of all VUS/CI had no measurable enzymatic activity, which is strong evidence of 
pathogenicity for these variants (Fig. 2E and Supplementary Table S1). Finally, M151K, the 
variant carried by the proband in Fig. 1, had no measurable enzymatic activity (Fig. 2F). 
Consistent with the clinical data, our biochemical analysis argues that FH p.Met151Lys is a 
pathogenic variant.  
In addition to characterizing FH missense variants, we also investigated FH 
p.Lys477dup (K477dup), the most common FH variant with frequencies as high as 1 in 195 in 
some populations16. Though compound heterozygosity involving K477dup may be pathogenic in 
the context of autosomal recessive fumarase deficiency17,18, the presence of K477dup alone 
does not correlate with increased risk for RCC13,19. We therefore reasoned that K477dup 
enzymatic activity levels might be used as a potential benchmark for evaluating pathogenicity of 
FH variants. We thus purified K477dup and measured its catalytic activity relative to wildtype 
enzyme. It has diminished catalytic efficiency for fumarate and near wildtype catalytic efficiency 
for malate (Supplementary Fig. S3-S5, S6G). Given the lack of a role in for K477dup in HLRCC, 
we expect that FH variants with activity greater than that of K477dup are likely benign 
(Supplementary Fig. S6H). 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
FH forms a homotetramer with four substrate-binding sites (Supplementary Fig. S7A). It 
is reasonable that FH alterations that disrupt multimerization would also impact enzymatic 
function, yet we questioned whether multimerization status is a good predictor of FH function 
and thus pathogenicity. We therefore visualized abundance of multimerization species using 
native-PAGE with Coomassie staining and quantified bands by densitometry (Fig. 3A). For 
wildtype FH, 81% is tetrameric, with little variability across gels and production lots (Fig. 3B and 
Supplementary Fig. S7B). The pathogenic variants K230R, R233H, and N340K all had 
disrupted multimerization, consistent with crystal structures that place the mutated residues at 
multimerization interfaces (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Fig. S7C). However, the multimerization 
status of some of the VUS/CI tested was more variable; for example, Q376P and R350W are 
both enzymatically inactive, but only Q376P has markedly disrupted multimerization (Fig. 3B). 
We next analyzed all of the FH variants tested in Fig. 2 (Fig. 3B and Supplementary Fig. 
S7D-E). We observed disrupted multimerization for all variants that occurred at multimerization 
interfaces, including non-bonding, hydrogen-bonding, and salt bridge-forming residues. 
(Supplementary Fig. S8B). While there was no apparent relationship between monomeric or 
dimeric species and catalytic activity, there was a slight positive correlation between 
tetramerization and catalytic efficiency (Supplementary Fig. S8C-G), consistent with the notion 
that tetramerization is necessary for enzymatic activity.  
A survey of all inactive variants from Fig. 2 showed significant variability in 
multimerization status, including M151K which had a tetramer abundance almost identical to 
wildtype (Fig. 3C). We tested whether % tetramerization could accurately classify active/inactive 
variants, but found that it only has modest diagnostic ability (Supplementary Fig. S8H).  
Together, these data suggest that FH tetramerization is necessary for enzymatic activity; 
however, multimerization status alone cannot predict pathogenicity.   
 
Defining fumarate-driven metabolism 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
FH inactivation is accompanied by a rise in fumarate levels and leads to broad metabolic 
rewiring that has been well-described by several labs (reviewed in 8,12). FH loss and fumarate 
accumulation drives the succination of L-arginine to produce argininosuccinate via reversal of 
the urea cycle enzyme argininosuccinate lyase20,21. Fumarate reacts non-enzymatically with the 
side chain of free or protein-incorporated cysteines to produce 2-succinyl-cysteine (2SC)22–26. 
Additionally, FH loss is associated with oxidative stress caused by the non-enzymatic 
succination of glutathione (GSH) to produce succinicGSH27,28.  
We used our catalogue of FH variants to decipher how varying levels of fumarate 
accumulation impacts HLRCC-associated RCC cell metabolism. We generated a panel of 
HLRCC cells with varying levels of FH activity by expressing V5-tagged FH variants with a 
range of catalytic efficiencies in the HLRCC cell line NCCFH1, then we measured proliferation 
rates and analyzed metabolites by liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) (Fig. 4A-
B and Supplementary Fig. S9A). Principal component analysis using the LC-MS data showed 
that FH variants with similar catalytic activities clustered together, demonstrating that much of 
the metabolic variation in this dataset is associated with FH enzymatic activity (Supplementary 
Fig. S9B). Fumarate/malate ratios correlated well with loss of FH catalytic efficiency and 
proliferation rates (Supplementary Fig. S9C-D).  As expected, known fumarate-regulated 
metabolites, such as arginosuccinate, succinicGSH, and 2-SC, correlated well with 
fumarate/malate ratios (Fig. 4C). We next investigated how fumarate accumulation across our 
panel of HLRCC cells engineered to express varying levels of FH activity impacts levels of 164 
metabolites routinely measured in our targeted metabolomics pipeline (Fig. 4C). Metabolites 
that significantly correlated or anti-correlated with fumarate/malate ratio with a Pearson r ≥ 0.8 
or ≤ -0.8 are shown in Fig. 4C. Most notably, 8/10 of the metabolites that were most highly 
correlated with fumarate/malate ratios were involved in nucleotide biosynthesis. Additionally, 
metabolites in the reductive branch of the TCA cycle were negatively correlated with 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
fumarate/malate ratios. We therefore questioned whether fumarate accumulation is sufficient to 
dysregulate the associated pathways.   
 
FH inactivation decreases TCA intermediates 
Since FH is a TCA cycle enzyme, FH activity loss would be predicted to broadly impact 
TCA metabolism, even beyond the increased fumarate/malate ratio. Indeed, previous studies 
have found that FH-deficiency results in decreased TCA intermediates: α-ketoglutarate, citrate, 
isocitrate, and malate29. Consistent with this finding, our panel of cell lines with differing levels of 
fumarate accumulation revealed an inverse correlation between fumarate/malate ratios and 
TCA intermediates (Fig. 4C). Wildtype FH expression in another HLRCC cell line, UOK-262, led 
to decreased fumarate/malate ratios, a reduction in known fumarate-regulated metabolites, and 
increases in TCA intermediates (Fig. 4D and Supplementary Fig. S9E). HLRCC cells use 
glutamine to fuel TCA metabolism through reductive carboxylation30 (Supplementary Fig. S10A), 
which is likely a consequence of fumarate-driven PDK activity and PDH inhibition by post-
translational modification31. We used stable-isotope labeling of glutamine and glucose to 
determine the relative contribution of each carbon source to TCA intermediates in conditions 
where fumarate is high (HLRCC cells expressing GFP) versus low (HLRCC cells expressing 
wildtype FH). Consistent with glutamine as the primary source of carbons for the TCA cycle in 
cells with elevated fumarate levels, HLRCC cells expressing GFP labeled with U-13C-glutamine 
had a higher ratio of 13C-labeled TCA metabolites than HLRCC cells labeled with U-13C-glucose 
(Supplementary Fig. S10B-D). FH expression in two different HLRCC cell lines, UOK-262 and 
NCCFH1, only slightly increased the ratio of U-13C-glucose-labeled TCA metabolites or had no 
effect on TCA metabolite glucose labeling, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S10A-C).  As 
expected, the total levels of fumarate and succinate were decreased and malate levels were 
increased in HLRCC cells expressing FH (Supplementary Fig. S10A-D). While FH expression 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
led to increased levels of intermediates within the reductive branch of the TCA cycle, no 
consistent changes were observed in acetyl-CoA levels. 
In cells labeled with U-13C-glutamine, nearly all of the citrate/isocitrate, cis-aconitase, 
and α-ketoglutarate were labeled as m+5, consistent with glutamate metabolism through 
reductive carboxylation (Supplementary Fig. S10D). While cells expressing FH increased flux of 
carbons through oxidative decarboxylation, as evidenced by m+4 malate, we observed 
persistent m+5 labeling of citrate/isocitrate, cis-aconitase, and α-ketoglutarate, indicating that 
reductive carboxylation is the primary route of glutamine metabolism even when fumarate is 
low. These findings show that transient changes in fumarate levels are insufficient to alter the 
flow of carbons through reductive carboxylation in HLRCC cells. 
 
FH inactivation leads to glutathione biosynthesis 
Among the metabolites that most strongly correlated with fumarate/malate ratios was 
cystathionine, a precursor of cysteine synthesis (Fig. 4C). The acquisition of cysteine is 
generally considered to be the rate-limiting step in glutathione biosynthesis32,33; thus, we 
hypothesized that fumarate accumulation regulates de novo glutathione biosynthesis. 
Consistent with this idea, metabolite set enrichment analysis (MSEA) revealed significant 
regulation of glutathione metabolism in both HLRCC cell lines expressing FH (Fig. 4E). We 
therefore analyzed metabolites involved in glutathione biosynthesis and found that FH 
expression in HLRCC cells decreased cystathionine and cysteine levels (Supplementary Fig. 
S11A), though GSH levels were unchanged.  FH expression in HLRCC cells had no effect on 
the GSH/GSSG ratios, indicating that despite fumarate accumulation, cells with and without FH 
expression achieve similar levels of redox homeostasis (Supplementary Fig. S11B).  
Glutathione is a tripeptide consisting of cysteine, glutamate, and glycine. The reactive sulfur on 
the side chain of cysteine can be oxidized and broadly controls the redox status of cells. We 
therefore analyzed cysteine incorporation to glutathione by culturing cells with 3,3,3’,3’-2H-

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
cystine, a precursor to cysteine followed by LC-MS-based metabolite analysis (Supplementary 
Fig. S11C). GSH and oxidized glutathione (GSSG) were labeled by cysteine, though the 
labeling was decreased in HLRCC cells expressing FH (Supplementary Fig. S11D). There was 
a slight increase in the labeling of cysteine and γ-glutamylcysteine (γ-GluCys) in UOK-262 cells 
expressing FH, but no change in NCCFH1 cells expressing FH. We next analyzed incorporation 
of glutamate in GSH by labeling cells with U-13C-glutamine. Consistent with the cystine-tracing 
experiments, GSH and GSSG were labeled, but to a lesser extent in HLRCC cells expressing 
FH (Supplementary Fig. S11E). FH expression slightly decreased the labeling of glutamate, but 
had no effect on the labeling of γ-GluCys. The lack of change in glutamine labeling of γ-GluCys 
together with the decreased labeling of GSH and GSSG in HLRCC cells expressing FH suggest 
that fumarate accumulation impacts reactions downstream of γ-GluCys to increase glutathione 
biosynthesis. Finally, fumarate accumulation is negatively correlated with ophthalmate, a 
biomarker of glutathione depletion (Supplementary Fig. S11E)34. Together these data suggest 
that the increased glutathione biosynthesis in HLRCC cells, which lack functional FH, may 
counter oxidative stress caused by GSH depletion through the formation of succinicGSH 
(Supplementary Fig. S11F). 
 
FH inactivation restricts de novo purine biosynthesis 
Interestingly, the two metabolites that most highly correlated with fumarate/malate ratios 
across our panel of NCCFH1 HLRCC cells engineered to express FH variants with differing 
levels of enzymatic activity (Fig. 4A) were 1-(phosphoribosyl)imidazolecarboxamide (SAICAR) 
and adenylosuccinate (Fig. 4C), which are both substrates of adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL)-
catalyzed reactions. Consistently, wildtype FH expression UOK-262 cells led to decreased 
fumarate/malate ratios, a reduction in known fumarate-regulated metabolites, and decreased 
levels of both SAICAR and adenylosuccinate (Fig. 4D and Supplementary Fig. S9E). Along with 
SAICAR, we observed a decrease in other nucleotide biosynthesis intermediates in UOK-262 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
cells with wildtype FH expression. Additionally, MSEA indicated that purine metabolism is 
among the most highly altered pathways in HLRCC cell lines engineered to express GFP versus 
wildtype FH (Fig. 4E). Finally, analysis of co-dependency scores by the DepMap project 
revealed a correlation between FH essentiality and many genes involved in nucleotide 
biosynthesis, which suggests a potential functional overlap in the pathways (Supplementary Fig. 
S12)35. Together, these data indicate that FH catalytic activity may regulate nucleotide 
biosynthesis.  
 Surprisingly, we found that AICAR, a product of SAICAR metabolism by ADSL, was the 
most significantly enriched metabolite in UOK-262 cells expressing FH (Fig. 4D). This suggests 
a potential uncoupling of de novo IMP biosynthesis in conditions where fumarate is 
accumulated. Fumarate is produced in purine biosynthesis by ADSL which catalyzes two 
reactions: 1) desuccination of SAICAR to produce AICAR and fumarate, and 2) desuccination of 
adenylosuccinate to produce AMP and fumarate (Fig. 5A and Supplementary Fig. S13A). The 
observation that adenylosuccinate accumulates in Fh1-knockout mouse tissues has led others 
to theorize that ADSL is reversed when fumarate accumulates; however, this hypothesis 
remains to be tested12,36. Thus, we used stable-isotope tracing to investigate the directionality of 
ADSL-catalyzed reactions. We labeled HLRCC cell lines with U-13C-glutamine and analyzed 
metabolites by LC-MS. Glutamine provides carbons to both fumarate and aspartate with 
predominant isotopomers m+4 and m+3 respectively (Fig. 5A-B and Supplementary Fig. S13B). 
While neither AIR nor AICAR showed any mass shifts consistent with glutamine-derived 
carbons, we detected m+4, and to a lesser extent m+3, labeling of SAICAR, suggesting that 
fumarate contributes to synthesis of SAICAR (Fig. 5B and Supplementary Fig. S13B). Likewise, 
neither IMP nor AMP were labeled, yet we detected m+4 labeling of adenylosuccinate, 
consistent with fumarate reacting with AMP to produce adenylosuccinate (Supplementary Fig. 
S13C). These data indicate that fumarate accumulation drives the succination of AICAR and 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
AMP via the reversal of ADSL, which likely blocks the flow of carbons through de novo IMP 
biosynthesis and AMP synthesis. 
We next examined how purine biosynthesis is affected by fumarate accumulation and 
ADSL reversal. HLRCC cells expressing GFP or FH were labeled with U-13C-glucose, and 
metabolites were analyzed by LC-MS.  Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) is the initiating 
metabolite in de novo IMP biosynthesis and serves as the ribose base for nucleotide synthesis; 
atoms from glycine, aspartate, glutamine, CO , and 10-formyltetrahydrofolate are also used to 
2
construct IMP. We found that PRPP and phosphoribosylamine (PRA) were fully labeled from U-
13C-glucose and unchanged in abundance upon expression of FH in HLRCC cells (Fig. 5C and 
Supplementary Fig. S13D). However, levels of downstream purine biosynthesis intermediates 
were disrupted by FH expression: phosphoribosyl-N-formylglycineamide (FGAR), 
phosphoribosylformylglycineamine (FGAM), 5-aminoimidazole ribotide (AIR), and SAICAR 
levels were decreased, and AICAR levels were significantly increased in HLRCC cells 
expressing FH. These data suggest a block in conversion of SAICAR to AICAR caused by 
fumarate accumulation in FH-deficient HLRCC cells that can be relieved by expression of 
wildtype FH. Consistently, FH expression increased the abundance of ATP and GTP (Fig. 5D 
and Supplementary Fig. S13E). In HLRCC cells expressing GFP we observe m+5, m+6, m+7, 
m+8, and m+9 isotopomers of SAICAR, but only the m+5 isotopomer of AICAR, further 
suggesting that SAICAR conversion to AICAR is diminished upon fumarate accumulation (Fig. 
5C and Supplementary Fig. S13E).  FH expression in HLRCC cells leads to m+7 isotopomer 
detection of SAICAR and AICAR (Fig. 5C), consistent with ADSL conversion of SAICAR to 
AICAR in the absence of fumarate accumulation.   
We reasoned that HLRCC cells might adapt to the altered metabolism initiated by 
expression of exogenous FH, thus we queried whether altered purine metabolism is a direct 
effect of FH expression in HLRCC cells versus an effect of passage-mediated cell adaptation. 
We found that NCCFH1 cells infected with lentiviral FH have widescale metabolic alterations 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
compared to control cells, but that differential levels of many metabolites are diminished over 
time (Supplementary Fig. S14A). As might be expected for direct effects of FH expression in 
HLRCC cells, exogenous FH expression led to a stable decrease in fumarate/malate ratios and 
decreased levels of known fumarate-regulated metabolites that remained unchanged over 
several passages (Supplementary Fig. S14B). Likewise, FH expression decreased SAICAR and 
adenylosuccinate levels in a manner that was independent of passage number, suggesting that 
altered purine metabolism is also a direct effect of FH expression in HLRCC cells. Importantly, 
this sustained effect on purine metabolism occurred despite passage-dependent changes in FH 
protein levels and cell proliferation rates (Supplementary Fig. S14C-E). We confirmed the 
sustained decrease in SAICAR levels in FH-expressing UOK-262 cells, which was also stable 
across passages despite changes in cell proliferation (Supplementary Fig. S14F-I). 
Given our findings that FH loss-of-function causes accumulation of SAICAR and other 
purine intermediates (Fig. 4C) and that fumarate accumulation drives ADSL activity towards 
SAICAR production while blocking generation of AICAR (Fig. 5A-D), we expected that HLRCC 
cells with accumulated fumarate and decreased de novo IMP biosynthesis would be more 
reliant on purine salvage pathways for nucleotide biosynthesis and proliferation. Under 
replication stress, human cells can synthesize nucleotides through the purine salvage pathway 
that consists of the enzymes adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) and hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT), which catalyze reactions between PRPP and 
nucleosides to generate AMP, GMP, and IMP (Fig. 5E). We analyzed publicly available gene 
expression data and found that HLRCC primary tumors and metastases express APRT and 
HPRT1 at higher levels than adjacent normal kidney tissue (Fig. 5F).  
To get a sense for relative activities of APRT and HGPRT in HLRCC cells, we used a 
co-labeling strategy to measure contribution of de novo and salvage pathways to purine 
biosynthesis. We labeled HLRCC cells for 6 hours with amide-15N-glutamine and 13C-
adenine+13C-guanine, then used LC-MS to decipher the labeling patterns. We found that 13C-

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
adenine+13C-guanine dramatically increased levels of purine nucleotides in UOK-262 and 
NCCFH1 HLRCC cells (Fig. 5G and Supplementary Fig. S15A-C). 13C-adenine+13C-guanine 
stimulated purine labeling through both salvage and de novo pathways in a manner that was 
reduced by exogenous FH expression. Together these data demonstrate that fumarate 
accumulation in HLRCC cells blocks purine synthesis, rendering the cells reliant on purine 
bases to maintain nucleotide pools (Fig. 5H). 
We next investigated whether pyrimidine biosynthesis is similarly disrupted by FH loss. 
We found that FH expression in HLRCC cells increased the levels of aspartate, carbamoyl-
aspartate, and dihydroorotate; however, we did not detect changes in UMP levels or labeling 
(Supplementary Fig. S16A-B). Additionally,  we did not detect FH-dependent changes in 
sensitivity to the pyrimidine salvage inhibitor, gemcitabine.  Together these findings suggest that 
pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis is not affected by FH loss (Supplementary Fig. S16C-D), and 
highlight the specificity of the fumarate-driven block in purine biosynthesis. 
 
Targeting purine salvage reduces HLRCC tumor growth 
Given that fumarate accumulation leads to a dependence on the purine salvage pathway 
to maintain purine nucleotides, we reasoned that inhibiting purine salvage might restrict 
HLRCC-associated kidney cancer growth. Thus, we used a lentiviral strategy to express Cas9 
and sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 (control), APRT, and HPRT1 to disrupt expression of the 
enzymes (Fig. 6A and Supplementary Fig S17A). NCCFH1 cells displayed efficient knockout of 
both enzymes; however, in UOK-262 cells, the expression of HGPRT expression was restored 
by passaging cells, suggesting that a population of HGPRT-expressing cells out-competed 
knockout cells (Supplementary Fig. S17B). Despite the differences in knockout efficiencies, we 
observed decreased labeling of AMP, ADP, and ATP from 13C-adenine, and for NCCFH1 cells, 
we also observed decreased labeling of GMP, ADP, and ATP from 13C-guanine (Fig. 6B). When 
grown in human plasma-like media supplemented with adenine and guanine, 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
sgAPRT/sgHGPRT1-exprssing cells had decreased proliferation rates (Fig. 6C). Further, 
NCCFH1 cells expressing sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 grew much slower as subcutaneous tumor 
xenografts in NSG mice than cells expressing sgAAVS1 (Fig. 6D and Supplementary Fig. 
S17C).  These data support an important role for purine salvage in promoting HLRCC tumor 
growth in vivo.  We sought to confirm these results using another HLRCC cell line, but in our 
hands, UOK-262 cells are inconsistent in their ability to form tumor xenografts. We therefore 
established a new HLRCC cell line from a patient-derived xenograft (xp-152)37, which we named 
xp-152-cl. We confirmed xp-125-cl cells lack FH activity by tracing 13C-glutamine metabolism, 
which showed no detectable conversion of m+4 fumarate to m+4 malate, but instead all malate 
was of the m+3 isotopologue, derived from reductive carboxylation (Supplementary Fig. S17D). 
Further, FH expression in xp-152-cl cells increased malate levels and decreased levels of  
fumarate and fumarate-regulated metabolites (Supplementary Fig. S17E). As with UOK-262 
cells, expression of sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 in xp-152-cl cells decreased APRT but not HGPRT 
expression and diminished labeling of AMP, ADP, and ATP from 13C-adenine (Fig. 6E-F). Much 
like with the NCCFH1 cell line, expression of sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 decreased growth of xp-152-cl 
cell line-derived tumor xenografts (Fig. 6G), confirming the importance of the purine salvage 
pathway for HLRCC tumor growth. 
An important point is that both sets of sgAPRT/sgHPRT1-expressing tumors exhibited 
residual growth. Because we used a lentiviral system to knockout APRT and HPRT1, we in 
effect generated a heterogenous pool of knockout cells, where most cells were knockout, yet 
there were persisting cells that did in fact express APRT and HPRT1. Thus, we analyzed the 
resulting tumors for APRT and HGPRT expression and observed nearly equal levels of APRT 
and HPRT1 to sgAAVS1-expressing tumors, suggesting that the residual tumor growth was a 
result of outgrowth of wild type cells (Fig. 6H). 
We next decided to target purine salvage pharmacologically with 6-mercaptopurine (6-
MP), an analogue of hypoxanthine and potent inhibitor of APRT and HGPRT (Fig. 7A).  We 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
found that UOK-262 and NCCFH1 HLRCC cells were sensitive to 6-MP treatment in a FH-
dependent manner: FH expression increased the EC50 of 6-MP by an order of magnitude in 
both HLRCC cell lines (Fig. 7B-C). 6-MP drives cell cycle arrest in HLRCC cells, but does not 
initiate apoptosis in HLRCC cells (Supplementary Fig. S18A-B). Exogenous nucleosides were 
unable to rescue cells from 6-MP-driven decreases in proliferation, confirming the importance of 
purine salvage for cell proliferation (Supplementary Fig. S18C). Finally, we found that clinically-
relevant doses of 6-MP decrease the growth of NCCFH1-derived and xp-157-cl-derived tumor 
xenografts in vivo (Fig. 7E). Together these data demonstrate that fumarate-driven reversal of 
ADSL enzymatic activity towards SAICAR and adenylosuccinate, decreases de novo IMP 
biosynthesis, and renders HLRCC cells more reliant on purine salvage to support proliferation 
and tumor growth (Fig. 7F). 
 
Discussion 
As genetic testing is more readily used in the clinic, there is a resultant increase in the 
detection of FH alterations, many of which have an unclear association with disease. The 
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommends that VUS should 
not be used in clinical decision-making14; thus, a significant number of patients  harboring these 
alterations may not receive regular kidney cancer screening despite suspicion that their FH 
alterations might be pathogenic. For example, in Fig. 1 we present the case of a patient with 
RCC. The family history is highly suspicious of HLRCC: radiological and histological analysis of 
HLRCC confirm FH deficiency in the tumor, and germline testing showed the presence of a FH 
variant, p.Met151Lys. The clinical data represents one strong and two supporting evidences of 
pathogenicity, which allows for the assertion of this variant as “likely pathogenic”. Our enzymatic 
assays provide an additional strong evidence of pathogenicity (PS3), and when coupled with the 
data in Fig. 1, supports the assertion of this variant as “pathogenic”. This case represents a 
scenario where the enzymatic data can be used to reinterpret the pathogenicity of a variant. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Importantly, reevaluation of variants by others in the medical genetics field is necessary to 
change the overall interpretation of VUS/CI, and until that occurs offering screening to family 
members (as well as obtaining insurance authorization) would be controversial. This highlights 
the need to broaden our classification of patient-associated FH alterations in light of a potentially 
lethal kidney cancer syndrome where screening is cost-effective and saves lives38.  
We often need many layers of evidence to accurately predict pathogenicity, including 
functional analyses. The metabolic nature of FH and its critical role in TCA metabolism made 
this an ideal gene to functionally interrogate. Therefore, we sought to predict the pathogenicity 
of FH variants by quantifying catalytic efficiency in cell-free assays. Of the 74 VUS/CI tested, 
nearly half had no measurable enzymatic activity which is strong evidence of pathogenicity, and 
highlights the urgency to reclassify and contact individuals with these types of FH VUS/CI. 
Our catalogue of FH VUS/CI includes variants occurring at many different sites in the 
protein, including at multimerization interfaces. FH forms homotetramers with 4 active sites for 
fumarate/malate-binding and catalysis. Thus, we analyzed the multimerization status of all 74 
VUS/CI and 3 pathogenic variants. The abundance of tetramers correlated, although weakly, 
with catalytic efficiencies, which is consistent with the notion that tetramerization is a 
prerequisite for enzymatic efficiency. However, we also observed 13 out of 74 variants where 
multimerization was unaltered, but catalytic efficiencies were partially or entirely compromised 
(Supplemental Table S1). This is highlighted by variants such as M151K (the variant encoded 
by the germline alteration in the patient from Fig. 1), where multimerization status is similar to 
wildtype, yet the enzyme is catalytically inactive. Thus, while disrupting tetramerization appears 
to be sufficient to restrict catalytic activity, multimerization status itself has limited value for 
predicting catalytic activity and associated pathogenicity alone. 
Our classification of FH variants by enzymatic activity appears to robustly predict 
pathogenicity; pathogenic variants and M151K were enzymatically inactive. Our analysis of 
K477dup, a variant which does not confer additional RCC risk13, demonstrates its diminished 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
catalytic activity (Supplementary Fig. 6G-H); this variant might be used as a potential 
benchmark for catalytic activity, where variants with higher activity would be sufficient to 
suppress tumorigenesis. However, there are some limitations to this approach. For example, 
these studies cannot rule out the potential that some variants, while functional in the cell-free 
system, may be regulated at other levels in HLRCC cells (e.g. phosphorylation). However, it is 
worth noting that for the FH variants expressed in HLRCC cell lines (Fig. 4), fumarate/malate 
ratios correlated with their catalytic efficiencies measured in the cell-free assays 
(Supplementary Fig. S9C). Another possible limitation is the lack of in vivo models with the 
variants in question that would confirm pathogenicity. We and others are working toward 
developing in vivo models of HLRCC that would better recapitulate fumarate-driven cell 
transformation; we expect that as these models become available, pathogenicity of many FH 
variants will be able to be tested in vivo. 
Though our studies provide strong evidence of pathogenicity for inactive variants, it is 
more difficult to classify the variants with partial activity. For instance, is there a threshold of 
fumarate accumulation that is necessary for tumorigenesis? Alternatively, is there a linear 
relationship between fumarate accumulation and the potential for tumorigenesis? The 
identification of these variants with partial activity allowed us to investigate how subtle changes 
in fumarate accumulation might impact pro-oncogenic phenotypes and metabolism. We 
generated a panel of cell lines with increasing levels of fumarate accumulation by expressing 
FH variants with different catalytic efficiencies in HLRCC cells (Fig. 4). We observed a strong 
correlation between fumarate/malate ratios and proliferation rates (Supplementary Fig. S9D), 
which is consistent with a linear relationship between fumarate accumulation and tumorigenesis. 
For instance, while wildtype FH slowed proliferation of NCCFH1 cells, M151K had only a slight 
effect on the cell proliferation. As we better understand HLRCC cell transformation, it will be 
important to analyze how variants with partial activity might impact not just proliferation rates but 
also transformation, cell migration, and other aspects of tumorigenesis in vivo. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
This panel of cell lines with different levels of fumarate accumulation also presented an 
opportunity to investigate how minor alterations to FH activity and fumarate levels affect HLRCC 
metabolism. TCA intermediates were among the most anticorrelated with fumarate levels; 
expression of wildtype FH increased total levels of citrate/isocitrate, cis-aconitate, and α-
ketoglutarate without altering labeling patterns. Our findings demonstrate that glutamine is the 
main fuel source filling the TCA cycle and metabolized through reductive carboxylation, though 
there are differences between human and mouse FH/Fh1-deficient cells in metabolism of 
glutamine through reductive carboxylation20,24,30,40. Additionally, we observed a positive 
correlation between cystathionine and fumarate levels, which led us to investigate de novo 
cysteine and glutathione biosynthesis in HLRCC cells. We found that glutathione biosynthesis is 
increased in HLRCC cells, which may be a response to GSH-depletion occurring as a result of 
reactions with fumarate to form succinicGSH27,28. Thus, increased glutathione biosynthesis may 
help maintain redox balance in HLRCC cells.  While our data provides a snapshot of fumarate-
driven cellular metabolic rewiring in vitro, it will be important to determine whether similar 
metabolic changes occur as a result of fumarate accumulation in vivo. 
In cells lacking FH there is an increase in adenylosuccinate, which has led others to 
predict that fumarate disrupts the synthesis of AMP8,12,36. Here we provide evidence that 
fumarate drives the reversal of ADSL in HLRCC cells, resulting in adenylosuccinate and 
SAICAR accumulation and broadly disrupting AMP and IMP biosynthesis (Fig. 5). We leveraged 
the different labeling patterns of aspartate (m+3) and fumarate (m+4) from U-13C-glutamine to 
analyze the incorporation of either substrate into adenylosuccinate and SAICAR.  The 
observation of m+4 isotopomers in adenylosuccinate and SAICAR was consistent with reversal 
of ADSL in both reactions. Consistently, the increase in the AICAR/SAICAR ratio in cells 
expressing FH suggests that lowering fumarate restores the typical enzymatic activity of ADSL. 
Because de novo purine synthesis is diminished in cells lacking FH, we predicted that these 
cells rely on salvage from extracellular adenine and guanine to produce purine nucleotides. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Consistent with this notion, we found that FH-deficient cells metabolize adenine and guanine to 
produce purine nucleotides. CRISPR-mediated genetic disruption of purine salvage pathway 
enzymes  APRT and HGPRT reduced HLRCC cell proliferation and growth of xenograft tumors 
in vivo.  
Targeting purine salvage using 6-MP, which competitively inhibits purine salvage 
pathway enzymes HGPRT and APRT, restricted HLRCC cell proliferation and the growth of 
xenograft tumors in vivo. Importantly, 6-MP is also metabolized to thioinosine monosphosphate 
(TIMP) and 6-methyl-thioinosine monophosphate (MeTIMP), which inhibit other aspects of 
purine biosynthesis including glutamine-5-phosphoribosylpyrophosphate amidotransferase, 
adenylosuccinate synthase, and IMP dehydrogenase (Supplementary Fig. S18D)39. Though our 
LC-MS methods were not able to detect 6-MP, TIMP, or MeTIMP in xenograft tumors, we were 
able to detect thiouric acid, which is an inactive metabolite of 6-MP, suggesting that 6-MP was 
taken up by the HLRCC xenograft tumors (Supplementary Fig. S18E). Further, tumors treated 
with 6-MP had decreased levels of purine nucleotides and intermediates.  
It is likely that fumarate accumulation renders cells more sensitive to 6-MP due to: 1) a 
necessary reliance on the purine salvage pathway resulting from the fumarate-driven reversal of 
ADSL enzymatic activity, and/or 2) increased nucleoside uptake and metabolism, including 6-
MP. We expect that inhibitors that specifically target the purine salvage pathway without 
affecting other aspects of purine biosynthesis would be effective at restricting the growth of FH-
deficient cells with minimal effect on non-transformed, FH-expressing cells. Re-purposing fairly 
well-tolerated agents like 6-MP or azathioprine could be an exciting pathway to rapidly translate 
these discoveries to the clinic. 
Together our findings highlight the need to establish cancer-associated risks for germline 
FH alterations, suggest the pathogenicity of many patient-associated FH variants, and 
demonstrate that fumarate accumulation disrupts purine biosynthesis in HLRCC cells which 
may be targetable using existing clinical compounds.  

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Methods 
Ethical regulations. The use of tissue and clinical information was permitted through our 
institutional review board (IRB) approved protocol 19-001174. Interrogation of patient-derived 
FH variants found after genetic risk assessment was permitted through our IRB approved 
protocol #21- 000887.  
All animal experiments were approved by the UCLA Animal Research Committee (ARC), 
and we complied with all relevant ethical regulations. Mice were housed in a pathogen-free 
facility at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). We used the minimum number of mice 
necessary to obtain significant and reliable data. 
 
Bacteria-expression plasmid cloning. Gibson cloning (NEB) was used to generate a bacteria 
expression plasmid containing 6His-tagged FH, lacking the first 44 amino acids, corresponding 
to the mitochondrial targeting sequence. This resulting plasmid, pet28a-FH(45-510), was used 
to generate expression plasmids with FH variants using a QuikChange II kit (Agilent). Sanger 
sequencing was used to confirm sequence identity. 
 
Recombinant FH and cell-free assays. BL21-STAR E. coli cells carrying pet28a-FH(45-510) or 
mutant constructs were grown to density in Luria Broth with kanamycin (50 µg/mL) by shaking 
overnight at 37°C with agitation. The culture was diluted 20-fold then allowed to grow for 2 hours 
at 37°C with agitation. IPTG was added to 0.5 mM then incubated at 37°C for 2 hours with 
agitation. E. coli was harvested by centrifugation, then resuspended in bacteria lysis buffer (50 
mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 1% triton X-100, 10 mM imidazole, 20% glycerol, 
1 mM TCEP, protease inhibitors, and 5 mg/mL lysozyme). Bacteria were lysed by 6 rounds of 
freeze-thaw, then the cell extract was cleared by centrifugation. His-tagged FH(44-511) was 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
purified from the lysate using HisPurTM Cobalt Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher). Columns were 
washed using with buffer A (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween-20, 
and 10 mM imidazole) and recombinant protein was eluted using buffer B (50 mM sodium 
phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween-20, and 300 mM imidazole). The eluate was 
dialyzed against buffer C (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 300 mM NaCl, and 1 mM TCEP) 
overnight at 4 °C. The protein concentration was quantified using Bradford reagent then diluted 
to 10 µM in 50% glycerol, 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.5 mM TCEP. 
Recombinant was stored at -20°C with no detectable decrease in activity over several months. 
To validate purity, recombinant proteins were resolved on SDS-Polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis followed by Coomassie staining. 
 
Cell-free assays. The activity of recombinant FH was determined by quantifying the change in 
absorbance at 250 nm a wavelength which is absorbed by fumarate but not by malate. 
Recombinant FH was diluted to 10 nM in reaction buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 150 
mM NaCl, and 0.25% tween-20). Reactions were started by adding fumarate or malate and 
various concentrations, following which absorbance was measured every minute for 30 minutes 
on an Agilent BioTek Synergy H1. All reactions were carried out at 37°C. For all plates, a 
standard curve was measured in technical triplicates in order to quantify fumarate depletion 
(forward reaction) or fumarate generation (reverse reaction). A linear regression was used for to 
model reaction rates. Rates were fitted to a Michaelis-Menten model and associated V , K , 
max m
and k  were calculated with standard errors using GraphPad Prism (RRID:SCR_002798). 
cat
Catalytic efficiencies were calculated as k /K . 
cat m
 
Native-PAGE. Multimerization status was analyzed by resolving proteins on precast Mini-
PROTEAN® TGXTM gels (BioRad) using 1X Tris/Glycine buffer (BioRad) with 0.02% Coomassie 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
G in the cathode buffer. NativeMarkTM Unstained Protein Standard (Thermo Fisher) was used to 
validate determine the molecular weight associated with each band. Bands were quantified 
using ImageJ. 
 
Cell lines, cell culture and reagents. UOK-262 (RRID:CVCL_1D72) cells were provided from the 
laboratory of Brian Shuch (UCLA). The NCCFH1 cell line is owned by the National Cancer 
Centre of Singapore Pte Ltd. The patient-derived xenograft line xp-152 was provided from 
Xiankai Sun (University of Texas, Southwestern). The cell line xp-152-cl was generated by 
dissociating a 3 mm3 portion of xp-152, then passaging adherent cells for > 40 passages such 
that 1) surviving cells appeared to be immortal, 2) we observed no passage-to-passage 
variation in proliferation rates, and 3) we detected no fumarate oxidation. All HLRCC cell lines 
were grown in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 2mM 
pyruvate. HEK293T cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, 
RRID:CVCL_0063) and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% 
penicillin/streptomycin. All cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO , and monitored regularly 
2
for mycoplasma using either a MycoAlert detection kit (Lonza, LT07-318) or by PCR analysis 
using an established protocol41,42. 
 
Lentiviral plasmid cloning. Standard PCR/restriction enzyme cloning was used to produce a 
mammalian lentiviral expression plasmid containing FH with a c-terminal V5-tag. The resulting 
plasmid, pLenti6-FH-V5, was used as a template for generating expression plasmids with FH 
variants using the QuikChange II kit (Agilent). Sanger sequencing was used to confirm 
sequence identity for all plasmids. The control plasmid, pLenti6-GFP, was a gift from Daniel 
Haber (Addgene plasmid # 35637; http://n2t.net/addgene:35637; RRID:Addgene_35637)43. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Lentivirus production and transduction. HEK293T cells were transfected with a pLenti6 transfer 
plasmid, pRSV-Rev, pMDLg/pRRE, and pCMV-VSV-G. pRSV-Rev was a gift from Didier Trono 
(Addgene plasmid # 12253; http://n2t.net/addgene:12253; RRID:Addgene_12253). 
pMDLg/pRRE was a gift from Didier Trono (Addgene plasmid # 12251; 
http://n2t.net/addgene:12251; RRID:Addgene_12251). pCMV-VSV-G was a gift from Bob 
Weinberg (Addgene plasmid # 8454; http://n2t.net/addgene:8454; RRID:Addgene_8454). 48 
hours post-transfection media was collected and filtered at 0.2 µm, then immediately used to 
transduce HLRCC cells. 
  HLRCC cells were transduced with lentivirus containing 4 µg/ml polybrene. 16 hours 
after transduction, media containing lentivirus was replaced with fresh media. 24 hours later, 
media was replaced with fresh media containing 2 µg/ml blasticidin. 
 
Cell proliferation assays. Cells were seeded at 50,000 cells per well of a 6-well dish in triplicate. 
24 hours later, three wells were counted using a particle counter. For remaining wells, cells 
were washed twice with PBS and media was replace, then 48 hours later all remaining wells 
were counted. Cell counts were used to model the growth grates (k) using the exponential 
growth equation.  
 
LC-MS and analysis. Cells were seeded in triplicate in 6-well plates such that at 16-24 hours, 
cells were at 70-90% confluency. For 13C-, 2H, or 15N-labeling experiments, cells were washed 
twice with PBS then treated for 6 hours with DMEM containing 10% dialyzed-FBS, 1% 
penicillin/streptomycin, and tracers. The following tracers were used in place of unlabeled 
metabolites in the media: 25 mM U-13C-glucose, 4 mM U-13C-glutamine, 0.2 mM 3,3,3’,3’-2H-
cystine, 4 mM amide-15N-glutamine, 50 µM 8-13C-adenine, and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine (all from 
Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
  Cells were washed twice with cold ammonium-acetate, pH 7.4, then 80% methanol 
containing 10 nM trifluoromethanesulfonate (internal standard) was added and cells were 
incubated at -80°C for 15 minutes. Cells were scraped, transferred to microcentrifuge tubes, 
vortexed well, then cleared by centrifugation. Supernatant was transferred to a new tube and 
dried over a continuous flow of N  for 1 hour. Metabolites were maintained at -80°C until 
2
analyzed by LC-MS. 
  Dried metabolites were reconstituted in 100 µl of 50% acetonitrile. Samples were 
vortexed and cleared by centrifugation. 10 µl of of the metabolite mixture was injected per 
analysis. Samples were run on a Vanquish (Thermo Scientific) UHPLC system with mobile 
phase A (20 mM ammonium carbonate, pH 9.7) and mobile phase B (100% acetonitrile) at a 
flow rate of 150 µL/min on a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC Polymeric column (2.1 × 150 mm 5 μm, EMD 
Millipore) at 35°C. Separation was achieved in three steps: 1) a linear gradient from 80% B to 
20% B for 20 minutes, 2) a linear gradient from 20% B to 80% B for 0.5 minutes, and 3) 80% B 
for 7.5 minutes. The UHPLC was coupled to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass analyzer 
running in polarity switching mode. 
  Each file was centroided and converted into positive and negative mzXML files using 
msconvert from ProteoWizard.  MZmine 2 was used to generate ion chromatograms from MS1 
spectra via a built-in Automated Data Analysis Pipeline (ADAP) chromatogram module44. Peaks 
were detected via the ADAP wavelets algorithm. Peaks were aligned across all samples via the 
Random sample consensus aligner module, gap-filled, and assigned identities using an exact 
mass MS1(+/-15ppm) and retention time RT (+/-0.5min) search of our in-house MS1-RT 
database. Our MS1-RT database consists of 164 metabolites for which we have analyzed 
standards. Peak boundaries and identifications were then further refined by manual curation. 
Peaks were quantified by area under the curve integration. Fumarate/malate and other ratios 
were calculated by dividing peak areas. If stable isotope tracing was used in the experiment, the 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
peak areas were additionally processed via the R package AccuCor 2 to correct for natural 
isotope abundance45. Peak areas for each sample were normalized by the measured area of 
the internal standard trifluoromethanesulfonate (present in the extraction buffer) and by the 
number of cells present in the extracted well. MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (RRID:SCR_015539) was used 
to conduct over-representation metabolite set enrichment analysis using metabolic pathways 
annotated by KEGG46,47. 
 
Immunohistochemistry. Immunostaining for 2SC was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-
embedded tissue (FFPE) sections using rabbit anti-human 2SC polyclonal antibody (Cambridge 
Research Biochemicals Cat# crb2005017, RRID:AB_2892588) at a dilution of 1:1000 with a 
modified Agilent FLEX Envision detection system with an Automated Autostainer (AS48Link). All 
FFPE slides were pretreated with Heat Induced Epitope Retrieval (HIER) in Dako PTLink using 
Envision FLEX Target Retrieval solution and incubated 97℃ for 20 minutes.  
 
Immunoblotting. Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 40 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, 
1 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM sodium flouride, 10 
mM β-glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 2 µg/ml leupeptin, 2 
µg/ml pepstatin, and 1 mM PMSF. Immunoblotting was performed using standard procedures. 
The following commercially available antibodies were used: GFP (Cell Signaling Technology 
Cat# 2956, RRID:AB_1196615; dilution 1:1000), FH (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4567, 
RRID:AB_11178522; dilution 1:1000), v5-HRP (Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# R961-25, 
RRID:AB_2556565; dilution 1:50,000), and α-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich Cat# T6074, 
RRID:AB_477582; dilution 1:10,000). 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Gene expression. RNA-sequencing data from HLRCC-associated primary kidney tumors, 
metastases, and adjacent normal kidney tissue was obtained from NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus – GSE-15725648. GEO RNA-seq Experiments Interactive Navigator (GREIN) was 
used to obtain counts per million for all samples49. 
 
Mouse cell line xenografts. 5E6 NCCFH1 or xp-152-cl cells in a 1:1 mixture of Matrigel and PBS 
were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of 7 week-old NSG mice. Tumors were monitored 
regularly for growth by calipering, and tumor volume was calculated as (LxW2)/2 where L is 
length and W is width. Every experimental group contained an equal number of male and 
female mice. For 6-MP experiments, treatment began when the tumors reach 150 mm3. 6-MP 
was resuspended in DMSO at a high concentration, which was then diluted into injection buffer 
(0.9% NaCl, 50 mM glycine, pH 10), which was then delivered to each mouse via intraperitoneal 
injection every other day. Each mouse received no more than 0.5 µL/g DMSO per dosing. 
Tumors were harvested when the first tumor reached our designated endpoint (1000 mm3) or 
mice started to show signs of distress. Tumors were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and serum 
was collected and stored at -80 °C. 
 
Cell cycle and apoptosis analysis. Cells were seeded at a low density such that following 
treatment, cells would be sub-confluent for the cell cycle and apoptosis analysis. Cells were 
treated for 48 hours with media containing 6-MP or DMSO. A control apoptosis group recieved 
0.1 µM staurosporine for 24 hours. Cell suspensions were co-stained with VybrantTM 
DyeCycleTM Green (Thermo Fisher) and Annexin V, Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate (Thermo Fisher) 
for 30 minutes at room temperature in conjugation buffer (10 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl, and 
2.5 mM CaCl , pH 7.4). Cells were analyzed on a BD LSRFortessaTM cell analyzer. 
2
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Replication. All experiments were performed with a minimum of three biological replicates for 
each experiment. All mouse experimental groups included ≥8 mice, with equal numbers of male 
and female mice. 
 
Quantification and statistical analyses. Graphs represent the mean ± standard error of the mean 
(SEM). For analyses with two or more groups, a two-way ANOVA was used to generate p-
values and percent variation. For analyses with only one group, a two-tailed Students t-test was 
used to generate p-values. p-values are represented as *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p 
≤ 0.0001. GraphPad Prism was used to model Michaelis-Menten kinetics and determine the 
fitted variables with standard errors. For Native-PAGE and densitometry experiments, ImageJ 
(RRID:SCR_003070) was used to quantify band density. The R package stats (version 3.6.2) 
was used to perform principal component analysis. BioRender.com was used to create 
visualizations, UCSF Chimera was used to visualize crystal structures, and GraphPad Prism 
was used to create graphs. 
 
References 
1.  Menko, F. H. et al. Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC): renal 
cancer risk, surveillance and treatment. Fam. Cancer 13, 637–644 (2014). 
2.  Tomlinson, I. P. M. et al. Germline mutations in FH predispose to dominantly inherited 
uterine fibroids, skin leiomyomata and papillary renal cell cancer the multiple leiomyoma 
consortium. Nat. Genet. 30, 406–410 (2002). 
3.  Launonen, V. et al. Inherited susceptibility to uterine leiomyomas and renal cell cancer. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98, 3387–3392 (2001). 
4.  Pasini, B. & Stratakis, C. A. SDH mutations in tumorigenesis and inherited endocrine 
tumours: Lesson from the phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma syndromes. in Journal of 
Internal Medicine vol. 266 19–42 (NIH Public Access, 2009). 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
5.  Udager, A. M. et al. Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Carcinoma (HLRCC): A 
rapid autopsy report of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Am. J. Surg. Pathol. 38, 567–577 
(2014). 
6.  Gleeson, J. P. et al. Comprehensive Molecular Characterization and Response to 
Therapy in Fumarate Hydratase–Deficient Renal Cell Carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 27, 
2910–2919 (2021). 
7.  McEvoy, C. R. et al. SDH-deficient renal cell carcinoma associated with biallelic mutation 
in succinate dehydrogenase A: comprehensive genetic profiling and its relation to therapy 
response. npj Precis. Oncol. 2, (2018). 
8.  Yong, C., Stewart, G. D. & Frezza, C. Oncometabolites in renal cancer. Nature Reviews 
Nephrology vol. 16 156–172 (2020). 
9.  Shanmugasundaram, K. et al. The oncometabolite fumarate promotes pseudohypoxia 
through noncanonical activation of NF-κB signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 24691–24699 
(2014). 
10.  Tong, W. H. et al. The glycolytic shift in fumarate-hydratase-deficient kidney cancer 
lowers AMPK levels, increases anabolic propensities and lowers cellular iron levels. 
Cancer Cell 20, 315–327 (2011). 
11.  Bratslavsky, G., Sudarshan, S., Neckers, L. & Linehan, W. M. Pseudohypoxic pathways 
in renal cell carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 4667–4671 (2007). 
12.  Schmidt, C., Sciacovelli, M. & Frezza, C. Fumarate hydratase in cancer: A multifaceted 
tumour suppressor. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 98, 15–25 (2020). 
13.  Lu, E. et al. Fumarate Hydratase Variant Prevalence and Manifestations Among 
Individuals Receiving Germline Testing. Cancer 128, 675 (2022). 
14.  Richards, S. et al. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a 
joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and 
Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 17, 405–424 (2015). 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
15.  Nykamp, K. et al. Sherloc: a comprehensive refinement of the ACMG–AMP variant 
classification criteria. Genet. Med. 19, 1105 (2017). 
16.  Karczewski, K. J. et al. The mutational constraint spectrum quantified from variation in 
141,456 humans. Nature 581, 434–443 (2020). 
17.  Prasad, C., Prasad, C., Napier, M. P. & Rupar, C. A. Fumarase deficiency: a rare 
disorder on the crossroads of clinical and metabolic genetics, neurology and cancer. Clin. 
Dysmorphol. 26, 117–120 (2017). 
18.  Coughlin, E. M. et al. Molecular analysis and prenatal diagnosis of human fumarase 
deficiency. Mol. Genet. Metab. 63, 254–262 (1998). 
19.  Zhang, L. et al. Fumarate hydratase FH c.1431_1433dupAAA (p.Lys477dup) variant is 
not associated with cancer including renal cell carcinoma. Hum. Mutat. 41, 103–109 
(2020). 
20.  Adam, J. et al. A Role for Cytosolic Fumarate Hydratase in Urea Cycle Metabolism and 
Renal Neoplasia. Cell Rep. 3, 1440 (2013). 
21.  Zheng, L. et al. Reversed argininosuccinate lyase activity in fumarate hydratase-deficient 
cancer cells. Cancer Metab. 2013 11 1, 1–11 (2013). 
22.  Alderson, N. L. et al. S-(2-Succinyl)cysteine: A novel chemical modification of tissue 
proteins by a Krebs cycle intermediate. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 450, 1–8 (2006). 
23.  Tyrakis, P. A. et al. Fumarate Hydratase Loss Causes Combined Respiratory Chain 
Defects. Cell Rep. 21, 1036–1047 (2017). 
24.  Ternette, N. et al. Inhibition of Mitochondrial Aconitase by Succination in Fumarate 
Hydratase Deficiency. Cell Rep. 3, 689–700 (2013). 
25.  Ooi, A. et al. An antioxidant response phenotype shared between hereditary and sporadic 
type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Cell 20, 511–523 (2011). 
26.  Adam, J. et al. Renal Cyst Formation in Fh1-Deficient Mice Is Independent of the Hif/Phd 
Pathway: Roles for Fumarate in KEAP1 Succination and Nrf2 Signaling. Cancer Cell 20, 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
524 (2011). 
27.  Sullivan, L. B. et al. The Proto-oncometabolite Fumarate Binds Glutathione to Amplify 
ROS-dependent signaling. Mol. Cell 51, 236–248 (2013). 
28.  Zheng, L. et al. Fumarate induces redox-dependent senescence by modifying glutathione 
metabolism. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–12 (2015). 
29.  Ternette, N. et al. Inhibition of Mitochondrial Aconitase by Succination in Fumarate 
Hydratase Deficiency. Cell Rep. 3, 689–700 (2013). 
30.  Mullen, A. R. et al. Reductive carboxylation supports growth in tumour cells with defective 
mitochondria. Nat. 2011 4817381 481, 385–388 (2011). 
31.  Gonçalves, E. et al. Post-translational regulation of metabolism in fumarate hydratase 
deficient cancer cells. Metab. Eng. 45, 149–157 (2018). 
32.  Griffith, O. W. & Mulcahy, R. T. The enzymes of glutathione synthesis: gamma-
glutamylcysteine synthetase. Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 73, 209–267 (1999). 
33.  Griffith, O. W. Biologic and pharmacologic regulation of mammalian glutathione 
synthesis. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 27, 922–935 (1999). 
34.  Soga, T. et al. Differential Metabolomics Reveals Ophthalmic Acid as an Oxidative Stress 
Biomarker Indicating Hepatic Glutathione Consumption. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 16768–
16776 (2006). 
35.  Tsherniak, A. et al. Defining a Cancer Dependency Map. Cell 170, 564-576.e16 (2017). 
36.  Bardella, C. et al. Aberrant succination of proteins in fumarate hydratase-deficient mice 
and HLRCC patients is a robust biomarker of mutation status. J. Pathol. 225, 4–11 
(2011). 
37.  Wu, C.-Y. et al. The impact of calorie-limited diets on the detectability of renal cell 
carcinomas by positron emission tomography with 2-deoxy-2-18F-fluoro-D-glucose. J. 
Nucl. Med. 61, 1209–1209 (2020). 
38.  Thompson, A. J. et al. Cost-effectiveness model of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
surveillance in hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma (HLRCC). J. Med. 
Genet. jmedgenet-2021-108215 (2022) doi:10.1136/JMEDGENET-2021-108215. 
39.  Toksvang, L. N., Lee, S. H. R., Yang, J. J. & Schmiegelow, K. Maintenance therapy for 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: basic science and clinical translations. Leuk. 2022 1–10 
(2022) doi:10.1038/s41375-022-01591-4. 
40.  Adam, J. et al. Fumarate Hydratase Deletion in Pancreatic β Cells Leads to Progressive 
Diabetes. Cell Rep. 20, 3135 (2017). 
41.  Uphoff, C. C. & Drexler, H. G. Detecting mycoplasma contamination in cell cultures by 
polymerase chain reaction. Methods Mol. Biol. 731, 93–103 (2011). 
42.  Uphoff, C. C. & Drexler, H. G. Detection of mycoplasma in leukemia-lymphoma cell lines 
using polymerase chain reaction. Leukemia 16, 289–293 (2002). 
43.  Singh, A. et al. TAK1 inhibition promotes apoptosis in KRAS-dependent colon cancers. 
Cell 148, 639–650 (2012). 
44.  Pluskal, T., Castillo, S., Villar-Briones, A. & Orešič, M. MZmine 2: Modular framework for 
processing, visualizing, and analyzing mass spectrometry-based molecular profile data. 
BMC Bioinformatics 11, 1–11 (2010). 
45.  Wang, Y., Parsons, L. R. & Su, X. AccuCor2: isotope natural abundance correction for 
dual-isotope tracer experiments. Lab. Investig. 2021 10110 101, 1403–1410 (2021). 
46.  Xia, J. & Wishart, D. S. MSEA: a web-based tool to identify biologically meaningful 
patterns in quantitative metabolomic data. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, W71–W77 (2010). 
47.  Xia, J., Psychogios, N., Young, N. & Wishart, D. S. MetaboAnalyst: a web server for 
metabolomic data analysis and interpretation. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, W652–W660 
(2009). 
48.  Crooks, D. R. et al. Mitochondrial DNA alterations underlie an irreversible shift to aerobic 
glycolysis in fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cancer. Sci. Signal. 14, (2021). 
49.  Mahi, N. Al, Najafabadi, M. F., Pilarczyk, M., Kouril, M. & Medvedovic, M. GREIN: An 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Interactive Web Platform for Re-analyzing GEO RNA-seq Data. Sci. Reports 2019 91 9, 
1–9 (2019). 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 1: Patient presentation with germline FH variant of uncertain significance, 
p.Met151Lys, suggests pathogenicity. (A) Pie chart showing the proportion of HLRCC-
associated FH variant classification as either benign (or likely-benign), pathogenic (or likely-
pathogenic), conflicting interpretation of pathogenicity (CI), or variant of uncertain significance 
(VUS) in June 2022. (B) Family history of RCC patient is suspicious of HLRCC. Proband is 
indicated by black arrow. Colors indicate HLRCC-associated morbidities – RCC (red) and 
fibroids/hysterectomy/myomectomy (blue). Age is listed for each individual as well as ages at 
which morbidities manifested or procedures conducted. The presence of FH p.Met151Lys is 
also indicated. The probands siblings were not tested for FH alterations. (C) [18F]-
fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT scan of patient indicating right renal mass as indicated by white 
arrow. (D) H&E staining of renal mass demonstrates a typical HLRCC-associated kidney cancer 
morphology, including eosinophilic papillary architecture with classical peri-nucleolar halos and 
prominent organiophilic nucleoli. (E) Immunohistochemistry demonstrates the renal mass is FH 
positive. (F) 2-succinylcysteine (2-SC) is diffusely positive in the cytoplasm and nuclei. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 2: Biochemical classification of 74 patient FH variants provides strong evidence of 
pathogenicity for many VUS/CI. (A) Recombinant FH was produced and purified from E. coli 
as shown by SDS-PAGE gels stained by Coomassie. Each variant is colored according to the 
associated interpretation of pathogenicity: pathogenic (red) and VUS/CI (green). For (B-D), 
recombinant FH was incubated with increasing concentrations of substrate, fumarate (top) or 
malate (bottom), and the reaction progress was quantified. Wildtype (WT) FH was run 
simultaneously for each variant, as indicated by the black symbols/lines. (B) All pathogenic 
variants could not be modeled by Michaelis-Menten kinetics, indicating that these variants are 
inactive. Michaelis-Menten plots from wildtype enzyme are indicated by black symbols/lines. (C) 
VUS/CI have a range of enzymatic activities. (D) FH with annotated domains and graphs 
indicating the catalytic efficiencies of 74 FH variants for fumarate (top) and malate (bottom). For 
each graph, WT catalytic efficiency is indicated as a dotted line. No variants in the mitochondrial 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
targeting sequence (MTS) were tested because the recombinant FH lacked the first 44 amino 
acids to improve solubility and purification. (E) Pie chart showing the proportion of VUS/CI that 
were inactive or active (including partial activity). (F) Graphs showing that M151K (product of FH 
p.Met151Lys described in Fig. 1) is enzymatically inactive. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 3: Tetramerization is necessary but not sufficient for transformation. (A) Recombinant 
FH was analyzed by Native-PAGE with Coomassie staining. Enzyme separated out to 
tetramers, dimers, and monomers, indicated as T, D, and M respectively. (B) Densitometry was 
used to quantify the percentage of each multimerization species for each variant. (C) Percent 
tetramerization for all variants that did not fit Michaelis-Menten kinetics in Fig. 2. Wildtype (WT) 
percent tetramer is indicated as a dotted line. All variants that are within 1 standard deviation of 
WT percent tetramer are indicated by darker gray bars. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 4: Loss of FH activity is associated with widespread metabolic changes. (A) 
Schematic depicting generation of an HLRCC cell line panel with varying levels of FH activity 
and fumarate.  NCCFH1 cells were engineered to express GFP (control), wildtype FH, or FH 
variants with differing levels of catalytic activity. Metabolites were harvested and analyzed by 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Fumarate/malate ratios were calculated 
and correlated with other metabolites. (B) Fumarate/malate ratios across the panel of HLRCC 
cell lines engineered to have varying levels of FH activity. Pathogenic variant is indicated in red, 
13 VUS/CI are indicated in green, M151K is indicated by the black arrow. C, Heatmap showing 
that fumarate/malate ratios (FMR) correlate with metabolites that have previously been linked to 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
fumarate accumulation. This analysis was expanded to 164 targeted metabolites. Those that 
correlated with FMR with a Pearson r ≥ 0.8 or ≤ -0.8 are shown. (D) Volcano plot showing the 
dysregulation of metabolites in UOK-262 cells expressing FH. Fumarate-regulated metabolites, 
de novo IMP biosynthesis intermediates, and TCA intermediates are highlighted. Two of the 
most highly-altered metabolites, SAICAR and AICAR, which are sequential metabolites in de 
novo IMP biosynthesis, were regulated in opposite directions. (E) Metabolite set enrichment 
analysis was performed on HLRCC cells expressing GFP or FH. Pathways that were significant 
in HLRCC cell lines (p ≤ 0.05) are noted with their respective -log (p-values). 
10

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 5: Loss of FH activity disrupts de novo purine biosynthesis. (A) Schematic 
representing the flow of carbons in the TCA cycle and de novo IMP biosynthesis from U-13C-
glutamine in HLRCC cells. Fraction of 13C-labeled isotopomers for (B) fumarate, aspartate, AIR, 
SAICAR, and AICAR. (C) Relative peak areas for de novo IMP biosynthesis intermediates in 
UOK-262 cells treated with U-13C-glucose. Bars are colored by the relative amount of individual 
13C isotopomers. (D) Normalized peak areas for ATP and GTP. (E) Schematic of the purine 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
salvage pathway. (F) Expression of APRT and HPRT1 in HLRCC patient primary tumors, 
metastases, and adjacent normal kidney tissue. Data is publicly available at NCBI Gene 
Expression Omnibus GSE157256. (G) Depiction of how ATP and GTP are labeled by amide-
15N-glutamine, 8-13C-adenine, and 8-13C-guanine. UOK-262 cells were treated for 6 hours with 4 
mM amide-15N-glutamine, 50 µM 8-13C-adenine, and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine, and ATP and GTP 
were analyzed by LC-MS for mass shifts corresponding to de novo synthesis (purple) or salvage 
pathway (orange). (H) Summary of how FH loss impacts purine biosynthesis. In cells without 
active FH, fumarate accumulates which drives the succination of AICAR by ADSL to produce 
SAICAR (reverse reaction). This prevents de novo IMP biosynthesis, leaving the cells reliant on 
the salvage pathway to support purine synthesis. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig 6: Purine salvage pathway enzymes promote HLRCC tumor growth. (A) Immunoblots 
evaluating APRT and HGPRT expression in NCCFH1 and UOK-262 cells infected with 
LentiCRISPR-Puro and LentiCRISPR-Blast containing sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 (control), 
APRT, and HPRT1. (B) Fraction of m+1 purine nucleotide isotopologues resulting from 6 hour 
treatment with 50 µM 8-13C-adenine and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine. (C) Proliferation rates in cells 
expressing sgAAVS1 or sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 at treated with human plasma-like media 
supplemented with 50 µM adenine and 50 µM guanine. (D) Volume of NCCFH1 tumor 
xenografts expressing sgAAVS1 or sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 as determined by caliper measurements 
(n = 10). Two-way ANOVA was performed for each time point and -log (p-value) is plotted 
10
below, with significant values (p ≤ 0.05) falling into the gray region. (E) Immunoblots evaluating 
the expression of APRT and HGPRT in xp-152-cl cells infected with LentiCRISPR-Puro and 
LentiCRISPR-Blast containing sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 (control), APRT, and HPRT1. (F) 
Fraction of m+1 purine nucleotide isotopologues resulting from 6 hour treatment with 50 µM 8-
13C-adenine and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine. (G) Volume of xp-152-cl tumor xenografts expressing 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
sgAAVS1 or sgAPRT/sgHPRT1 as determined by caliper measurements (n = 8). Two-way 
ANOVA was performed for each time point and -log (p-value) is plotted below, with significant 
10
values (p ≤ 0.05) falling into the gray region. (H) Immunoblots evaluating the expression of 
APRT and HGPRT in lysates from NCCFH1 and xp-152-cl cell lines and corresponding tumor 
xenograft lysates.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Fig. 7: Inhibition of purine salvage by 6-mercaptopurine disrupts HLRCC tumor growth. 
(A) Schematic of the purine salvage pathway and inhibition by 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP). (B-C) 
Proliferation (relative to DMSO treated cells) of NCCFH1 and UOK-262 cells expressing GFP or 
FH and treated with varying concentrations of 6-MP. Fitted values for EC  are higher for FH-
50
expressing cells. (D) Volume of NCCFH1 tumor xenografts from mice treated with vehicle or 40 
mg/kg 6-MP (n = 10). Student’s T-test was performed for each time point and -log (p-value) is 
10
plotted in the middle, with significant values (p ≤ 0.05) falling into the gray region. Mouse weight 
for each time point is plotted at the bottom. (E) Volume of xp-152-cl tumor xenografts from mice 
treated with vehicle, 10 mg/kg 6-MP, or 40 mg/kg 6-MP (n = 10). Student’s T-test was 
performed for each time point and -log (p-value) is plotted in the middle, with significant values 
10
(p ≤ 0.05) falling into the gray region. Mouse weight for each time point is plotted at the bottom. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(F) Schematic illustrating how fumarate accumulation disrupts de novo purine biosynthesis, 
rendering FH-deficient tumor cells reliant on purine salvage for maintenance of purine 
nucleotides and tumor growth. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S1: Analysis of FH variants and their associated interpretations of 
pathogenicity. (A) Pie chart showing proportion of all FH variant annotated in ClinVar and their 
classification as either benign (or likely-benign), pathogenic (or likely-pathogenic), CI, or VUS. 
(B) HLRCC-associated, protein-altering FH variants split into benign (or likely-benign), 
pathogenic (or likely-pathogenic), and VUS/CI. Colors represent the type of mutation, showing 
that nearly all of the VUS/CI are missense mutations. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S2: Kinetic parameters for active/partially-active VUS/CI. (A) K , (B) 
m
k , and (C) catalytic efficiency for wildtype (WT) and P174R. Data is reported for fumarate (left) 
cat
and malate (right) indicating compromised enzymatic activity in both directions. (D) K , (E) k , 
m cat
and (F) catalytic efficiency for WT and A70T. Data is reported for fumarate (left) and malate 
(right). While K  and k  for fumarate are higher for A70T, catalytic efficiencies are nearly 
m cat
identical to WT, suggesting that this variant is comparable in activity to WT enzyme. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S3: Recombinant FH produced for 74 VUS/CI. Recombinant FH was 
produced and purified from E. coli as shown by SDS-PAGE gels stained by Coomassie. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S4: Michaelis-Menten graphs for VUS/CI incubated with fumarate. 
Recombinant FH was incubated with increasing concentrations of substrate fumarate and 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
conversion to product was measured. Wildtype (WT) FH was run simultaneously for each 
variant, as indicated by the black symbols/lines. VUS/CI have a range of enzymatic activities. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S5: Michaelis-Menten graphs for VUS/CI incubated with malate. 
Recombinant FH was incubated with increasing concentrations of substrate malate and 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
conversion to product was measured. Wildtype (WT) FH was run simultaneously for each 
variant, as indicated by the black symbols/lines. VUS/CI have a range of enzymatic activities. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S6: Broad analysis of recombinant FH. (A) k  for wildtype (WT) FH. All 
cat
analyses (3 reaction series per plate) are reported as symbols, broken down into lots and 
substrates. For all possible comparisons, -log (p-value) is reported as a heatmap, showing 
10
widespread change across lots and substrates. (B) Catalytic efficiencies for WT FH, broken 
down into lots and substrates. -log (p-value) is reported as a heatmap, demonstrating reduced 
10
variability across lots, but maintaining variability between substrates. (C) A two-way ANOVA 
was performed on all WT data reported in panels a and b. The protein lot had a greater 
contribution to the total dataset variation for k  than for catalytic efficiency. For catalytic 
cat

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
efficiency, substrate had >4-times the contribution to the total variation in the dataset than the 
lot. (D) Linear regression of catalytic efficiencies for fumarate and malate. The data correlated 
well (Spearman ρ = 0.921), suggesting that mutations typically alter catalytic activity for both 
directions. Relative catalytic efficiency for (E) fumarate and (F) malate for all variants with 
measurable catalytic activity. (G) Catalytic efficiencies for K477dup. (H) Relative catalytic 
efficiencies for all variants with measurable catalytic activity. K477dup is indicated by a dashed 
line, which might serve as a benchmark, where variants with higher catalytic efficiencies could 
be sufficient to suppress tumorigenesis. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S7: Multimerization status of 74 VUS/CI. (A) Schematic demonstrating 
the binding pattern of multimers in tetrameric FH. Residues interact with other chains as non-
bonding, hydrogen bonding, and salt bridge-forming. (B) Analysis of wildtype (WT) FH for each 
gel shows little variation in multimerization patterns across lots. (C) Crystal structure of FH 
(3E04) with R233 and N340 and their hydrogen bonds with residues in other chains. (D) Native-
PAGE gels stained with Coomassie showing variation in multimerization status. (E) Graph 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
indicating the percent tetramerization for 74 FH variants. WT percent tetramerization is indicated 
as a dotted line. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S8: Tetramerization correlates with catalytic activity. (A) Percent of 
multimerization species for wildtype (WT) and variants that occur at multimerization interfaces, 
including those that occur at residues participating in non-bonding, hydrogen bonding, and salt 
bridge-forming interactions. Catalytic efficiencies for fumarate compared to the percent (B) 
tetramer, (C) dimer, and (D) monomer. Catalytic efficiencies for malate compared to the percent 
(E) tetramer, (F) dimer, and (G) monomer. The positive correlation between catalytic efficiency 
and percent tetramerization suggests that tetramerization is necessary for catalytic activity. (H) 
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve investigating the diagnostic ability of % 
tetramerization for predicting catalytic activity, suggests that multimerization status is weakly 
predictive of enzyme activity. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S9: Expression of FH variants in HLRCC cells. Exogenous expression 
of GFP, V5-tagged FH, and V5-tagged FH variants in NCCFH1 cells. (A) Immunoblot showing 
expression of transgenes. (B) Principal component analysis using targeted metabolomics data. 
Data for the first 5 principal components are colored by expression of active, partially active, or 
inactive variants. Samples cluster together according to variant activity status. Also shown is the 
proportion of explained variance for principal components reaches 0.9 at PC18. (C) Catalytic 
efficiency as calculated in the cell-free assays correlates with fumarate/malate ratios in HLRCC 
cells expressing the corresponding variant. (D) Proliferation rates correlated with 
fumarate/malate ratios in HLRCC cells expressing the corresponding variants. (E) 
Fumarate/malate ratios UOK-262 cells expressing FH compared to control (GFP) cells.  

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S10: Fumarate accumulation decreases TCA intermediates. (A) 
Schematic showing the oxidative decarboxylation and reductive carboxylation as possible 
routes for glutamine and glucose metabolism in the TCA cycle. (B) Heatmap showing the 
fraction of 13C-labling for metabolites. The labeled atoms originated from U-13C-glucose (left) or 
U-13C-glutamine (right). (C) Relative metabolite levels for pyruvate and TCA intermediates in 
HLRCC cells expressing GFP or FH and treated with U-13C-glucose. Bars are colored by the 
relative abundance of isotopomers. (D) Relative metabolite levels for pyruvate and TCA 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
intermediates in HLRCC cells expressing GFP or FH and treated with U-13C-glutamine. Bars are 
colored by the relative abundance of isotopomers. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S11: FH loss enhances de novo glutathione biosynthesis. (A) Relative 
levels of intermediates of de novo glutathione biosynthesis. (B) Ratio of reduced glutathione to 
oxidize glutathione for HLRCC cell lines expressing GFP or FH. (C) Schematic illustrating de 
novo glutathione biosynthesis and colored by contribution glutamine and cystine. HLRCC cells 
expressing GFP or FH were treated with U-13C-glutamine and 3,3,3,3-2H-cystine and 
isotopomers of glutathione biosynthesis intermediates were quantified. (D) Cysteine and γ-

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
glutamylcysteine (γ-GluCys) were almost completely labeled from 3,3,3,3-2H-cystine. GSH and 
GSSG had a higher degree of labeling from 3,3,3,3-2H-cystine. (E) Glutamate and γ-
glutamylcysteine (γ-GluCys) were almost completely labeled from U-13C-glutamine. GSH and 
GSSG had a higher degree of labeling from 3,3,3,3-2H-cystine. (F) fumarate/malate ratio most 
negatively correlated with ophthalmate, a glutathione analogue and biomarker of reduced 
oxidative stress. (G) Schematic illustrating our proposed model for how fumarate and 
glutathione biosynthesis are coordinated to maintain oxidative homeostasis. When FH activity is 
lost, fumarate accumulates, which reacts with GSH to produce succinicGSH. As a result, 
glutathione biosynthesis is increased. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S12: Coessentiality of FH and nucleotide biosynthesis genes. 
Correlation of DepMap 22Q2 essentiality scores for FH compared to all other genes. Nucleotide 
biosynthesis genes are indicated as red dots. Top 41 genes from the co-essentiality analysis 
are shown on the right.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig.  S13: Loss of FH activity disrupts de novo purine biosynthesis. (A) 
Schematic representing the flow of U-13C-glutamine-derived carbons in the TCA cycle and AMP 
biosynthesis in HLRCC cells. Also depicted is purine synthesis via the salvage pathway. (B) 
Fraction of 13C-labeled isotopologues for fumarate, malate, AIR, SAICAR, and AICAR in UOK-
262 cells were treated with U-13C-glutamine. (C), Fraction of 13C-labeled isotopologues for IMP, 
adenylosuccinate, and AMP in HLRCC cell lines. (D) Relative peak areas for de novo IMP 
biosynthesis intermediates in NCCFH1 cells treated with U-13C-glucose. Bars are colored by the 
contribution of individual isotopologues. (E) log (fold-change) for purine nucleotides in HLRCC 
2
cell lines expressing GFP or FH.

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Supplementary Fig. S14: Dysregulated purine metabolism is independent of HLRCC cell 
proliferation rate. NCCFH1 cells were infected with lentivirus encoding GFP or FH and 
analyzed for 8 passages and analyzed for (A-B) 148 metabolites, (C) FH protein, (D) FH mRNA, 
and (E) proliferation rates. UOK-262 were infected with lentivirus encoding GFP or FH and 
analyzed for 8 passages and analyzed for (F) SAICAR, (G) FH protein, (H) FH mRNA, and (I) 
proliferation rates. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Supplementary Fig. S15: FH-deficient cells use the purine salvage pathway to maintain 
purine nucleotide levels. (A) NCCFH1 cells treated with for 6 hours with 4 mM amide-15N-
glutamine, 50 µM 8-13C-adenine, and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine and ATP and GTP were analyzed by 
LC-MS for mass shifts corresponding to de novo synthesis (purple) or salvage pathway 
(orange). (B) UOK-262 cells treated with for 6 hours with 4 mM amide-15N-glutamine, 50 µM 8-
13C-adenine, and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine and IMP, AMP, ADP, GMP, and GDP were analyzed by 
LC-MS for mass shifts corresponding to de novo synthesis (purple) or salvage pathway 
(orange). (C) NCCFH1 cells treated with for 6 hours with 4 mM amide-15N-glutamine, 50 µM 8-
13C-adenine, and 50 µM 8-13C-guanine and IMP, AMP, ADP, GMP, and GDP were analyzed by 
LC-MS for mass shifts corresponding to de novo synthesis (purple) or salvage pathway 
(orange).  

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S16: Pyrimidine metabolism in FH-deficient and FH-expressing cells. 
(A) Relative metabolite glutamine and pyrimidine biosynthesis intermediates in HLRCC cells 
expressing GFP or FH and treated with U-13C-glucose. Bars are colored by the relative 
abundance of isotopomers. (B) Relative metabolite glutamine and pyrimidine biosynthesis 
intermediates in HLRCC cells expressing GFP or FH and treated with U-13C-glutamine. Bars are 
colored by the relative abundance of isotopomers. (C-D) Proliferation (relative to DMSO treated 
cells) of NCCFH1 and UOK-262 cells expressing GFP or FH and treated with varying 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
concentrations of gemcitabine. Fitted values for EC  are higher for FH-expressing cells. (E) 
50
Schematic depicting the metabolism of pyrimidine synthesis intermediates in FH-deficient and 
FH-expressing cells. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S17: Disrupting expression of purine salvage enzymes impairs tumor 
growth. (A) Immunoblot analyzing APRT and HGPRT levels in NCCFH1 cells infected with 
LentiCRISPR-Blast with sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 or APRT (top) or infected with LentiCRISPR-
Puro with sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 or HPRT1. (B) Immunoblot analyzing HGPRT levels in 
UOK-262 cells infected with LentiCRISPR-Puro with sgRNAs targeting AAVS1 or HPRT1 at 
passages 1 and 5 post-infection and selection. (C) Endpoint tumor volumes of NCCFH1 tumor 
xenografts expressing sgAAVS1 or sgAPRT/sgHPRT1. (D) Fraction fumarate and malate 
isotopologues in xp-152-cl cells treated with U-13C-glutamine for 6 hours. (E) Relative levels of 
fumarate, malate, fumarate/malate ratio, and fumarate-regulated metabolites in xp-152-cl cells 
expressing GFP or FH. Endpoint tumor volumes of NCCFH1 tumor xenografts expressing 
sgAAVS1 or sgAPRT/sgHPRT1. (F) Immunoblots evaluating the expression of APRT and 
HGPRT in lysates from NCCFH1 and xp-152-cl cell lines and corresponding tumor xenograft 
lysates. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.15.504023; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Supplementary Fig. S18: Purine salvage inhibitor 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) impairs tumor 
growth. UOK-262 and NCCFH1 cells were treated for 48 hours with media containing DMSO or 
100 µM 6-MP or for 24 hours with 0.1 µM staurosporine and analyzed for (A) proportion of cells 
within the cell cycle stages and (B) relative number of cells undergoing apoptosis. (C) 
Proliferation rates of UOK-262 and NCCFH1 cells treated with media containing 100 µM 6-MP, 
10 µM adenosine, and 10 µM guanosine. (D) Schematic depicting how 6-MP disrupts purine 
salvage and biosynthesis.  6-MP is a competitive inhibitor of HGPRT. It is metabolized by 
HGPRT to generate 6-thioinosine-5-monophosphate (TIMP), which inhibits IMPDH and ADSS in 
GMP and AMP synthesis respectively. Further, TIMP can be metabolized by TMPT to generate 
MeTIMP, which inhibits GPAT, which catalyzes the initiating step in de novo IMP synthesis. (E) 
Volcano plot depicting the significant changes in NCCFH1 tumor xenografts from mice treated 
with 40 mg/kg 6-MP. We were able to detect thiouric acid, which accumulated in the tumors of 
6-MP treated mice. Blue dots represent purine nucleotides and purine biosynthesis 
intermediates. 

NEW PAGE