bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Aberrant phase separation is a common killing strategy of positively 
charged peptides in biology and human disease 
 
Steven Boeynaems1,2,3,4,5,6,*, X. Rosa Ma6,#, Vivian Yeong7,#, Garrett M. Ginell8,9,#, Jian-Hua Chen10,11, Jacob A. Blum6, 
Lisa Nakayama6, Anushka Sanyal6, Adam Briner12, Delphi Van Haver13,14,15, Jarne Pauwels13,14,15, Axel Ekman10,11, H. 
Broder Schmidt16, Kousik Sundararajan16, Lucas Porta17, Keren Lasker18, Carolyn Larabell10,11, Mirian A. F. Hayashi17, 
Anshul Kundaje6,19, Francis Impens13,14,15, Allie Obermeyer7, Alex S. Holehouse8,9, Aaron D. Gitler6,20*. 
 
1. Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
2. Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
3. Therapeutic Innovation Center (THINC), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
4. Center for Alzheimer’s and Neurodegenerative Diseases (CAND), Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
5. Dan L Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center (DLDCCC), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA 
6. Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
7. Department of Chemical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10027, USA 
8. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA 
9. Center for Biomolecular Condensates, Washington University in St Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA 
10. Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
11. Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA 
12. Clem Jones Centre for Ageing Dementia Research (CJCADR), Queensland Brain Institute (QBI), The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia 
13. VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, 9000 Gent, Belgium 
14. VIB Proteomics Core, 9000 Gent, Belgium 
15. Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 9000 Gent, Belgium 
16. Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
17. Department of Pharmacology, Escola Paulista de Medicina (EPM), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Paulo, 
Brazil. 
18. Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 
19. Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA 
20. Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA 
 
* co-corresponding authors 
# these authors contributed equally 
 
Co-corresponding authors: 
Aaron D. Gitler 
Stanford University 
1291 Welch Road 
Department of Genetics - Beckman Center 
Stanford, CA 94305-5120, USA 
E-mail: agitler@stanford.edu 
 
Steven Boeynaems 
Baylor College of Medicine - Texas Children’s Hospital 
1250 Moursund St 
Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute 
Houston, TX 77030, USA 
E-mail: steven.boeynaems@bcm.edu 
1 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
ABSTRACT 
Positively charged repeat peptides are emerging as key players in neurodegenerative diseases. These 
peptides can perturb diverse cellular pathways but a unifying framework for how such promiscuous 
toxicity arises has remained elusive. We used mass-spectrometry-based proteomics to define the protein 
targets of these neurotoxic peptides and found that they all share similar sequence features that drive 
their aberrant condensation with these positively charged peptides. We trained a machine learning 
algorithm to detect such sequence features and unexpectedly discovered that this mode of toxicity is not 
limited to human repeat expansion disorders but has evolved countless times across the tree of life in the 
form of cationic antimicrobial and venom peptides. We demonstrate that an excess in positive charge is 
necessary and sufficient for this killer activity, which we name ‘polycation poisoning’. These findings reveal 
an ancient and conserved mechanism and inform ways to leverage its design rules for new generations of 
bioactive peptides. 
 
KEYWORDS 
Phase separation, cathelicidin, protein aggregation, membraneless organelles, frontotemporal dementia, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, antimicrobial peptide, crotamine, RAN translation, LL-37. 
   
2 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
INTRODUCTION 
Nucleotide repeat expansions are implicated in an expanding group of human diseases1,2. There are 
several different subclasses. Polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases, at least 9 different diseases each caused by 
the expansion of an exonic CAG repeat, are perhaps the most well-known3. These disease genes harboring 
the CAG repeat expansions get translated into proteins with an expanded polyQ tract, which makes them 
aggregation-prone, resulting in the formation of inclusion bodies as the hallmark pathology. Besides 
polyQ,  expansions  of  exonic  GCG  and  CGG  repeats  produce  aggregation-prone  polyalanine  and 
polyglycine proteins, and cause a series of other diseases4,5. Repeat expansions in non-coding parts of 
genes can also cause disease. For example, in Fragile X-syndrome, large GC-rich expansions within 
promoter  or  5’  untranslated  regions  (UTR)  become  hypermethylated,  inhibiting  transcription  and 
resulting in haploinsufficiency6. When expanded nucleotide repeats are transcribed into RNA, the repeat 
RNAs  themselves  can  be  toxic–for  example,  CUG/CCUG  intronic/3’UTR  RNA  repeats  in  myotonic 
dystrophies7. These repeat RNAs have a propensity to condense and can trap important RNA-binding 
proteins in the process, impairing their function. Even though, these distinctions between coding and non-
coding repeats seemed simple at first, the picture has become more complicated. The repeat RNA of the 
exonic CAG repeats can be just as toxic as the intronic CUG ones8. Expanded repeats also can generate 
antisense transcripts, implicating additional types of repeat RNAs and proteins9. Moreover, repeat RNAs 
(even non-coding ones) can be aberrantly translated in an AUG-independent manner (referred to as RAN 
translation)10, greatly expanding the range of proteins that can be encoded from these nucleotide repeats. 
An archetype of this complexity is the repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene. A hexanucleotide 
GGGGCC expansion in the first intron of a previously undescribed gene was found to be the leading genetic 
cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD)11,12. Upon the discovery 
of this repeat expansion, an immediate question was one of mechanism—how does this expansion drive 
human  disease?  Evidence  has  emerged  linking  all of  the  aforementioned mechanisms  to  C9orf72 
pathogenesis. Hypermethylation of the expanded repeat affects transcription of the gene13, which seems 
to be implicated in autophagy14, vesicle trafficking15 and immune function16. Repeat RNA foci (both sense 
and antisense versions) accumulate in patient cells12,17. RAN translation of the sense and antisense repeat 
generates so-called dipeptide repeats (DPRs) that are detected in the brain and spinal cord of patients 
harboring this mutation17–19. These are poly-GA, poly-GP, poly-PA, poly-GR and poly-PR (abbreviated as 
their amino acid codes from here on). GP and PA do not seem to be toxic, whereas GA has mixed effects 
based on the model being used. The two arginine-rich DPRs, GR and PR, are potently toxic in diverse model 
systems—ranging from yeast to flies and worms, to vertebrates and iPSC-derived motor neurons20–23.  
Because GR and PR seem to be so toxic, there have been many different studies investigating the 
mechanisms of this toxicity. These studies have implicated disturbances in nucleocytoplasmic transport24–
26, defects in stress granules27,28, mitochondrial defects29, perturbation of axonal transport30, proteasome 
deficits31, and inhibition of translation28,32. All of these mechanisms could help explain the etiology of the 
disease, which is undoubtedly complex, but we wondered how can two amino acids repeated head to tail 
cause such widespread cellular defects? In other words, why are PR and GR such promiscuous killers that 
seemingly hit many unrelated biochemical pathways at once?  
Since their discovery a decade ago, the apparent “aspecificity” of PR and GR toxicity has confused 
the field. A unifying framework to explain the biological connection between their myriad effects and the 
observed target promiscuity has remained elusive. Here, we unexpectedly discover that the interactome 
of GR and PR is actually encoded in their biophysical behavior. We and others previously showed that PR 
and  GR  can  undergo  biomolecular  condensation  in  vitro  and  target  biomolecular  condensates  in 
3 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
cells22,27,28,33. Using new unbiased proteomics studies, we find that even the non-condensate effects of PR 
and GR can be explained by their “sticky” multivalency. Moreover, we find that nucleic acids are key 
modulators of their target space (i.e., the set of proteins that interact with GR and PR), explaining 
previously unresolved discrepancies between nuclear and cytoplasmic effects, and between disease 
models and patient material. Further, the recent identification of arginine-rich repeat peptides in at least 
three other degenerative conditions points at the emergence of a new class of repeat disorders centering 
around cationic peptides34–36, with potentially a shared pathophysiology. 
  Since our framework was able to connect pathological condensation events in a divergent set of 
biological pathways, we wondered whether we could harness it to predict novel physiological condensate 
proteins. Using machine learning approaches, we discovered that the promiscuous condensation-based 
toxicity of PR and GR is not limited to human disease but is an integral part of ancient natural anti-
microbial defense systems and spider, scorpion, and rattlesnake venoms. Similar cationic peptides have 
evolved  countless  times  independently  throughout  the  tree  of  life,  and  all  can  drive  aberrant 
condensation via electrostatic interactions. Finally, leveraging protein design, we show that a surplus of 
cationic charge is sufficient to turn an inert protein into a toxic killer peptide. Thus, a mechanism we name 
polycation poisoning is emerging as a powerful and unifying framework that guides our understanding of 
promiscuous killer peptides in health and disease, and may aid in the design of new generations of 
therapeutic bioactive peptides. 
 
RESULTS 
RNA concentration tunes the target space of arginine-rich dipeptides. 
In addition to C9orf72 ALS/FTD, other diseases also exhibit the same or similar arginine-rich peptides (Fig. 
1A). RAN translation of GGCCTG (NOP56) and AGAGGG (TAF1) repeats, linked to spinocerebellar ataxia 
type 36 (SCA36) and X-linked dystonia and parkinsonism (XDP), generate PR and GR DPRs, respectively34,35. 
QAGR tetrapeptide repeats are produced from the CCUG repeat in myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2)36. 
As we have shown previously for PR and GR, these QAGR peptides similarly condense in vitro when added 
to cell lysate (U2OS, Fig. 1B). We previously showed that PR and GR form liquid droplets in the test tube 
when combined with nucleic acids27, and these assemblies—or ones using other cationic peptides—have 
been since used as very simple in vitro models to study the biophysics of more complex RNA-centric liquid 
condensates in the cell37–40. Surprisingly, when we add these peptides to cell lysate, we observe the 
formation of irregular networked condensates (Fig. 1C, Fig. S1A)—more reminiscent of the pathological 
gel-like condensates found in neurodegenerative disease41,42. Adding additional RNA into the mixture (i.e., 
total yeast RNA), caused these assemblies to change morphology and acquire spherical shapes more 
similar to the liquid-like behavior of some physiological condensates (e.g., nuclear bodies like nucleoli43). 
Because the addition of RNA dramatically affected the appearance of these test tube assemblies, we 
wondered what this would mean for their protein composition. As expected, its negative charge allows 
RNA to compete with proteins in the cell lysate for binding to the positively charged PR peptide (Fig. 1D, 
Fig. S1B-D). Using unlabeled quantitative mass spectrometry, we dissected what this competition looks 
like at the level of individual proteins (Table S1). We calculated the relative solubility of proteins in the 
test tube after spinning down the PR-induced condensates—as a measure of condensate partitioning—
and clustered proteins according to their respective solubility profile as a function of the added RNA 
concentration (Fig. 1E-F). Around 50% of proteins in the mixture never partitioned into PR condensates 
and remained soluble throughout the experiment (cluster 1; grey proteins). For those proteins that 
4 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
condense with PR, 25% (clusters 2-5; red proteins) were outcompeted by low concentrations of RNA; the 
other 25% (clusters 6-9; blue proteins) were only outcompeted by high RNA concentrations or partitioned 
more strongly into the pellet upon the addition of RNA. Of note, this blue behavior is strikingly similar to 
the RNA-dependent re-entrant condensation behavior that has been observed for several RNA-binding 
proteins38,44,45. Thus, these results demonstrate that PR-interacting proteins can have distinct RNA-
dependent  interaction  profiles.  Interestingly,  these  three  clusters—simply  based  on  the  in  vitro 
condensation behavior of proteins with PR and RNA—each specifically enriched different functional 
categories of proteins (Fig. 1G). The blue class of proteins included canonical members of physiological 
condensates (e.g., nuclear speckles, nucleoli) or cellular assemblies that have been proposed to form via 
similar biophysical principles (i.e., heterochromatin46,47) (Fig. S2). Red proteins consisted of proteins not 
typically associated with physiological condensates but that have been implicated in protein aggregation 
or its modulation (Fig. 1H, Fig. S1E-H). Consistent with these findings, several of these distinct biological 
pathways—both red and blue—have been directly implicated in the toxicity observed in C9orf72 disease 
models  and/or  patients.  These  include  nuclear  import  receptors24,48,  protein  arginine  methyl 
transferases24,49,50,  microtubules30,  the  proteasome31,  the  translational  machinery28,32,51–53,  splicing 
factors28,54, nucleoli27,28,55,56, and heterochromatin57, among others. Thus, our simple test tube model 
recapitulates the target promiscuity of arginine-rich DPRs and provides a framework to understand how 
local RNA concentration modulates this target space, with important implications for pathophysiology 
(see Discussion). 
 
RNA-dependent behavior is encoded in sequence and follows an electrostatics framework. 
PR and GR’s apparent target promiscuity has remained enigmatic; how are they able to target such a wide 
range of unrelated biological pathways? Because we now have in hand an in vitro model of this target 
space, we could ask whether this behavior and its modulation by RNA are encoded by a protein’s 
sequence. First, overlapping our data with a set of experimentally validated RNA-binding proteins58 
showed that, as expected, blue proteins are enriched for RNA-binding activity compared to red and grey 
proteins (Fig. 2A). Second, based on amino acid composition, blue and red proteins separate based on 
their charge (Fig. 2A-B); blue proteins are on average more basic, red ones more acidic, and grey ones 
more neutral. We can even observe this effect when looking within protein families. 60S ribosomal 
proteins are on average more positively charged than the ones making up the 40S subunit, and this 
correlated with lower solubility profiles in our mass spectrometry experiment (Fig. 2C).  
While average charge can be informative, how charged residues are distributed across intrinsically 
disordered regions (IDRs) or on the surface of folded domains can substantially impact molecular 
interactions59–62. Therefore, we co-opted and extended our previously applied sequence clustering 
analysis63 to evaluate the position of acidic and basic residues in both IDRs and on the surface of 
neighboring fold domains (in linear space and three-dimensional space, respectively) (Fig. S3). By 
integrating proteome-wide structural predictions, this analysis revealed that—on average—blue proteins 
possess clusters of basic residues within IDRs, while red proteins possess clusters of acidic residues on the 
surface of folded domains (Fig. 2B, Fig. S4). We highlight two examples to further illustrate these 
observations. First, DEAD-box helicases (DDX) are a family of RNA chaperones that share the same type 
of folded domain typically flanked by IDRs. We identified red, blue, and grey DDX proteins in our assay, 
and, importantly, the positive charge clustering of their respective IDRs dictates their RNA-dependent 
5 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
condensation (Fig. 2D, Fig. S1G-H). Second, we identified two proteins that had virtually mirrored 
solubility profiles. SnrpD2 (a spliceosome component) shows very little acidic clustering on its folded 
domain but has a strongly basic pI, while Diablo (a mitochondrial protein) shows specific subregions with 
clusters of acidic residues (Fig. 2E). Despite having the same initial and final solubility in our mass 
spectrometry experiment, these proteins show opposite RNA-dependence, in line with their respective 
charge profiles. These analyses indicate that the differential protein-partitioning we observed in our mass 
spec experiment—on average—follows simple rules relating to the density and positioning of acidic and 
basic residues that tune protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions. We stress that these analyses 
report on average properties. Charge or the ability to bind RNA is predictive, but there are many examples 
of proteins that enrich differently. This argues that other—yet unresolved and probably more complex—
sequence features and protein-protein interactions modulate protein partitioning in our assay. 
 
Generating a machine learning algorithm to predict protein condensation. 
Because the condensate partitioning behavior in our mass spectrometry experiment correlated with 
certain sequence features, we reasoned that we could in principle use our experimental data set to learn 
to predict such behavior de novo. We trained a machine-learning algorithm64 (see Material & Methods) 
to predict blue proteins from their red and grey counterparts (Fig. 3A). Next, we asked the algorithm to 
rank intracellular proteins based on their “color” (Fig. 3B, Table S2). As expected, top predicted blue 
proteins  enriched  for  gene  ontology  terms  associated  with  nuclear  bodies,  RNA  and  chromatin 
metabolism (Fig. 3C). Interestingly, the algorithm also enriched intermediate filament proteins, which 
have been shown previously to engage with arginine-rich DPRs via their disordered head domains33. None 
of these condensation-related gene ontology terms came up for the red and grey class of proteins 
nominated by the algorithm. 
  Given blue proteins appear to consistently be associated with intracellular condensates, we 
decided  to  directly  test  our  algorithm’s  ability  to  predict  condensation  behavior  for  previously 
uncharacterized proteins. We tested the top ten uncharacterized proteins from our predicted blue protein 
list and expressed them in cells (Fig. 3D, Table S2). Seven of these formed or targeted condensates under 
normal conditions: C3orf49, C11orf98, C16orf87, C18orf21, and C19orf53 targeted nucleoli, C19orf47 
localized to nuclear speckles, and C20orf96 formed unknown cytoplasmic condensates. This result clearly 
demonstrates that our machine-learning model can predict cellular and biophysical behavior. Since our 
initial mass spectrometry experiment investigated condensation as a function of RNA concentration, we 
wondered how changing RNA availability would influence the behavior of our seven condensate-forming 
proteins. To do this, we decided to stress cells in two ways to change nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA 
availability–transcriptional shutdown and polysome disassembly. First, we shut down all transcription 
with a high dose of actinomycin D65. This made four out of five of the nucleolar proteins demix from the 
nucleolus into the nucleoplasm—a well-known response of several nucleolar proteins66,67. C3orf49 also 
showed localization to the nucleolar periphery in assemblies reminiscent of nucleolar stress caps68. The 
nuclear speckle protein C19orf47 remained in a condensed state upon transcription inhibition, but 
demixed from the nuclear speckle, showing that its condensation behavior was also modulated by RNA. 
Second, stressing the cells with arsenite—known to cause polysome disassembly in the cytoplasm and 
rewire transcription in the nucleus69—made C9orf85 partition into stress granules. Peculiarly, in addition 
to stress granule partitioning, C9orf85 also translocated into nucleoli in parallel. C4orf50, previously found 
6 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
in the nucleoplasm, now formed abundant small nuclear granules that were clearly distinct from nuclear 
speckles. Transcription inhibition or arsenite stress did not affect C20orf96 condensates. Finally, C4orf54 
localized to the actin cytoskeleton under all tested conditions (Fig. S4). 
  Combined, our algorithm predicted nine out of ten proteins correctly as condensate proteins, of 
which eight did so in a manner that was modulated by RNA availability. The only “incorrect” prediction, 
turns out to be a novel actin-binding protein. Interestingly, we and others have previously found that PR 
and GR can interact with actin50, microtubules30, and intermediate filaments33—highlighting that there 
may  be  more  generally  shared  sequence  features  between  cytoskeleton-binding  and  condensate 
proteins. Future studies will be required to investigate the functions of these new proteins and the 
functional significance of their condensate formation. In all, these findings indicate that our algorithm can 
predict condensate formation properties of proteins with high accuracy, allowing us and others to start 
systematically interrogating diverse proteomes. 
 
Condensation is a novel mode of action of bioactive killer peptides. 
In the above analysis, we restricted our search for novel condensate proteins to intracellular proteins 
since biomolecular condensates have been almost exclusively studied within the confines of the plasma 
membrane. But given the accuracy of our prediction tool, we reasoned that we could explore the possible 
existence of condensation events outside of the cellular context. When we fed sequences of secreted 
proteins into the algorithm, we unexpectedly found that it predicted several antimicrobial peptides 
(AMPs) to condense (Fig. 4A, Table S2). Animals, including humans, have evolved a wide array of AMPs70. 
A well-studied example is LL-37 (Fig. 4B). Some cationic AMPs have been shown to kill bacteria by 
permeabilizing their membranes, but for LL-37 and several other AMPs this does not seem to be their 
main mode of action71. Because of their positive charge, such peptides are expected to interact with 
membranes, hence, potentially crossing them. Indeed, cationic peptides are often called cell-penetrant 
since they are spontaneously taken up by both prokaryote and eukaryote cells72. This raised the question: 
what would happen once a cationic peptide like LL-37 enters the bacterial cytoplasm? To answer this, we 
first performed a similar ex vivo lysate assay as described above. Adding LL-37, or PR as a positive control, 
to E. coli lysate was able to potently drive condensate formation (Fig. 4C). Second, we treated live bacteria 
with LL-37 at a concentration corresponding to its minimum inhibitory concentration against a range of 
pathogens73. We subsequently imaged these bacteria using soft x-ray tomography, allowing us to gain 
information on their subcellular organization (Fig. 4D, Fig. S5A). LL-37 treated bacteria showed compacted 
nucleoids and evidence for the formation of dense cytoplasmic structures (Fig. 4E). Because DNA and 
ribosomes are the main components of the bacterial nucleoid and cytoplasm, respectively, we tested 
whether LL-37 could condense these biomolecules in the test tube; it did (Fig. 4F). Thus, we suggest that 
the intracellular condensation caused by LL-37 is responsible for its bactericidal activity. Since LL-37 
condenses with negatively charged biological structures, similar to PR, this condensation can be described 
according to the framework of so-called complex coacervation—originally conceptualized by the polymer 
physics field to describe the condensation of oppositely charged (bio)polymers74,75. 
  Is LL-37 a sole example of such a mechanism, or could this be more widespread? We analyzed 
thousands of curated AMPs76, revealing that positive charge is a common feature among them (Fig. 4G). 
We tested a set of cationic AMPs from various vertebrates and invertebrates and found that several 
induce condensation in our ex vivo assay (Fig. 4H). These results support our emerging hypothesis that 
7 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
positively  charged  peptides  could  offer  broad-spectrum  antibiotic  functionality  through  aberrant 
condensation of essential cellular components. 
While  AMPs  target  microbes,  nature  has  also  evolved  biochemical  tools  to  target  large 
multicellular organisms in the form of venoms. Although several well-known (paralytic) venom peptides 
have a clear mode of action—usually specifically binding and modulating ion channels—venoms are 
complex mixtures containing a range of other peptides. Among them, so-called necrotic peptides are 
cationic and seem mainly responsible for tissue damage and cell death77. Indeed, we found that cationic 
peptides from the venoms of scorpions, spiders, and rattlesnakes drive condensation in our ex vivo lysate 
assay (Fig. 4I). These results suggest that they have the biophysical capacity to condense, but do they 
exhibit this behavior in cells? Crotamine is a well-studied cell-penetrant rattlesnake peptide whose mode 
of action is incompletely resolved78. We added fluorescently-labeled crotamine to the medium of human 
cells (Fig. 4J). As a control, we added fluorescently labeled PR, which has been documented to traffic to 
nucleoli55,79. PR targeted the granular center of the nucleolus, consistent with other reports28,56, while 
crotamine targeted nucleolar subcompartments. PR did not target nuclear speckles but crotamine did. 
Both these potent killer peptides—one aberrantly produced from an expanded repeat in disease, one 
evolved in a venomous animal—similarly targeted RNA-rich nuclear bodies. Yet despite these similarities, 
distinct structural and sequence features determined condensate partitioning, providing evidence that 
condensate target specificity can be encoded in the sequences of even small peptides. 
 
Cationic charge is necessary and sufficient for killer activity. 
Both the arginine-rich repeat peptides in human disease and the natural killer peptides have one main 
feature in common: positive charge. Could it be that charge is necessary and sufficient for killer activity? 
To address the first question, we looked more deeply at the specific amino acid enrichments we had seen 
above. While AMPs are enriched for arginine- and lysine-rich sequences, we did not see any enrichment 
for histidine (Fig. 4G)76. This observation is not unexpected, given histidine is expected to be largely neutral 
at a pH of 7.0 – 7.4. Nonetheless, two of our top ten secreted predicted blue proteins belonged to the 
histatin family—a histidine-rich group of AMPs (Fig. S5B). When tested in the same assay as LL-37, histatin-
3 (HTN3) did not induce condensation in our ex vivo assay. However, histatins are expressed specifically 
in saliva, which is slightly acidic ( pH 6.5). Switching assay conditions from pH 7.5 to pH 6.5—coinciding 
with a net charge gain of +3—drove the strong condensation of HTN3 in E. coli lysate. This finding provides 
evidence  that  cationic  charge  is  required  for  condensation,  and  is  consistent  with  the  enhanced 
bactericidal activity of histatins under mildly acidic conditions first observed three decades ago80. Thus, 
evolution seems to have used histidine residues to generate pH-dependent condensation switches that 
tune the activity of AMPs to their respective biofluid of origin. 
Our work thus far suggests a net positive charge is necessary for toxicity of numerous AMPs, but 
is it sufficient? In other words, can we make a non-toxic protein toxic simply by altering its charge? GFP is 
probably the best-studied protein, with predictable behavior and folding, and is generally non-toxic to 
cells. By mutating residues facing out from the -barrel, one can generate GFP mutants that still fold 
properly (i.e., remain fluorescent) but have an altered surface charge (Fig. 5A)81. When we expressed a 
library of super folder GFP (sfGFP) variants—with net charges ranging from -24 to +24—in E. coli, we 
observed that cationic GFP variants caused bacterial growth arrest (Fig. 5B). Imaging these cells, we 
observed that the cationic GFP variants, but not the anionic ones, formed aberrant condensates with 
8 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
ribosomal  proteins  (Fig.  5C)  and  RNA82  at  the  bacterial  cell  pole.  Similarly,  when  we  combined 
recombinantly purified GFP variants with E. coli ribosomes in the test tube, only the cationic ones formed 
condensates (Fig. 5D). Thus, like we saw for LL-37, these GFP variants can drive charge-based coacervation 
of ribosomes—killing the cells. 
  We next tested the effect of these GFP variants in human cells. The cationic GFP variants 
spontaneously condensed in nucleoli and nuclear speckles in a charge-dependent fashion (Fig. 5E). Given 
cationic peptides often undergo spontaneous cellular entry, we wondered if our synthetic positively 
charged GFPs might also be sufficient for cellular uptake. To test this, we also added recombinant anionic 
and cationic GFP to the medium of cultured mouse cortical neurons. Virtually identical to our observations 
with PR and crotamine, cationic GFP was spontaneously taken up by cells and targeted the nucleolus, 
killing the neurons (Fig. 5F). Moreover, this cationic version of GFP did so at concentrations similar to or 
lower than the ones we and others have found GR to be toxic49,55,79. Importantly, this observation 
challenges that canonical expectation that cell-penetrant peptides must have evolved a specific and highly 
constrained mechanism for cellular uptake, instead implicating cellular entry as being driven in part if not 
entirely by a strong net positive charge. Finally, neuronal uptake of cationic GFP was not uniform; some 
cells rapidly accumulated large quantities of GFP, whereas in others the accumulation was slower or even 
absent. Note, this same heterogeneity has been observed for other cell-penetrant peptides as well83–85 
and is linked to cellular tolerance against their toxic effects83. Cells with low levels of nuclear GFP showed 
nucleolar localization as expected (Fig. 5G). Surprisingly, cells with high levels of GFP had non-detectable 
nucleoli (based on NPM staining) and showed marked condensation of DNA. The oversaturation of the 
nuclear  compartment  with  these  charged  molecules  seems  to  upset  the  physiological  balance  of 
electrostatic interactions, dramatically perturbing nuclear organization and leading to the demise of the 
cell (Fig. 5H). 
Taken together, our results suggest that positively charged peptides and proteins offer broad-
scale cellular toxicity. In some cases, this toxicity is an evolved function, while in others, it may be an 
unfortunate mishap through spontaneous repeat expansions that underlie human disease. Our results 
demonstrate that while precise target selectivity can clearly be encoded in a killer peptide’s sequence 
(e.g., crotamine vs PR), we conclude that cationic charge is a unifying sequence feature that is sufficient 
to drive killer activity. This process, which we name polycation poisoning, follows the simple framework 
of complex coacervation and has independently evolved countless times across the tree of life. 
 
DISCUSSION 
For a decade, the observed target promiscuity of C9orf72 arginine-rich DPRs has puzzled the field. 
Compelling data has connected their toxicity to a bafflingly diverse array of biological pathways20–22. But 
a unifying framework has so far remained elusive. Were these studies monitoring the cause of cell death 
or simply the downstream consequences of dying cells? We and others had previously shown that these 
peptides  can  condense  RNA  and  other  biomolecules,  explaining  their  effect  on  physiological 
condensates22,27,28,33. Here, we used proteomics to explore the target space of cationic dipeptide repeats 
and unexpectedly found that even their non-condensate targets fit into a simple electrostatics-based 
framework of complex coacervation. We propose that key actors in all these different biological pathways 
share the right sequence features that drive their aberrant interaction with these positively charged 
peptides. 
9 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Our framework also allows us to address the most common criticism against the pathological role 
for arginine-rich DPRs in patients. In every model system tested so far, PR—and to a lesser extent GR—
targets the nucleolus, making it potently toxic. Yet, this has never been observed in any pathology report 
using patient post-mortem material. For reasons that are currently unresolved, but a topic of intense 
study, both PR and GR seem to get trapped in the cytoplasmic GA inclusions in patients, thus preventing 
them from entering the nucleus17–19. Our results unambiguously demonstrate that RNA tunes the target 
space of PR (Fig. 1). As such, which proteins PR (and, by extension GR) interact with within the cell will 
depend on the local RNA concentration around those DPRs. The concentration of RNA in the nucleus is 
estimated to be 36 times higher than the cytoplasm44, where most RNA is also trapped in polysomes. As 
such, our test tube experiments provide lysate mimics of either a nucleus-like (high RNA) or cytoplasm-
like  (low  RNA)  environment,  enabling  us  to  dissect  which  proteins  are  PR  targets  in  these  two 
compartments. Under high RNA conditions, we observe PR interacting with proteins associated with 
nuclear bodies and chromatin. This mirrors the subcellular localization observed in model systems, where 
PR interacts with nucleoli27,28,55,56 and heterochromatin57. Under low RNA concentrations, PR interacts 
with the translation initiation complex, ribosomes, axonal transport factors, and protein arginine methyl 
transferases. Analysis of patient post-mortem samples provides evidence that these kinds of proteins do 
associate with cytoplasmic GR/PR inclusions in patients24,30,49,52,53. Although defects in condensation 
seemed initially limited to disease models that failed to fully recapitulate human pathology, we now show 
that the same framework of electrostatic condensation is still applicable but is tuned by the local RNA 
concentration. To our knowledge, this is the first model that is able to explain a decade of disconnect 
between most C9orf72 disease model-based studies and human pathology reports. 
  Pathogenesis does not exist in a vacuum, but instead follows already-established biochemical 
principles. Can we use a framework designed to understand pathology to infer novel functional biology? 
We used our proteomics dataset to train a machine learning algorithm to detect similar electrostatics-
based  condensation  behavior.  When  tested  on  the  human  proteome,  we  found  already  known 
condensate  proteins  but,  importantly,  also  predicted  this  behavior  in  completely  uncharacterized 
proteins. We  experimentally  validated  this  condensate  behavior  in  nine out  of  the ten  predicted 
proteins—showing that our approach allows for the discovery of new biology. The complete functional 
characterization of this set of novel condensate proteins is beyond the scope of this study, but we note 
that some of these proteins have substantial phenotypic effects in high-throughput knock-out studies86, 
arguing that their yet unknown function may carry cellular importance. It will be interesting to test if their 
condensation propensity is involved in their function, and whether they are implicated in human disease. 
  The (re)discovery of biomolecular condensation as an organizing principle of the cell besides 
membranes has revolutionized cell biology87,88. Ironically though, our exploitation of these insights has 
typically remained delimited by the plasma membrane. With our sequence-based condensate protein 
predictor in hand, we could now test for the condensation properties of extracellular proteins in a direct 
and unbiased way. To our initial surprise, we discovered that cationic killer peptides found in innate 
immune systems and venom cocktails are potent drivers of condensation, following the exact same set of 
rules we delineated for the human disease repeat peptides. Not impeded by GA inclusions like PR, venom 
peptides are able to gain entry to mammalian cells and readily target the nuclear centers of RNA 
production. AMPs condense both the nucleoid and ribosomes in bacteria. Our results demonstrate that 
two very different cellular systems (eukaryotes versus prokaryotes) with completely unrelated peptides 
follow the exact same framework of polycation poisoning. Indeed, using GFP as a scaffold we can engineer 
10 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
killer activity by simply making it positively charged, with its toxicity in neuronal culture rivaling that of 
the neurotoxic GR and PR peptides. 
  One question remains though: why positive and not negative charge? Although we do not rule 
out the existence of polyanion-based toxicity, there are some simple reasons why cationic peptides could 
be more disruptive. If we consider the cell as a collection of lipids, nucleic acids and proteins, a clear trend 
emerges. Lipids tend to have negatively charged head domains, nucleic acids are inherently anionic, but 
proteins can span the entire charge spectrum. Given all the negative charge on lipids, nucleic acids, and 
even the cytoskeleton (both actin filaments and microtubules have negatively charged surfaces), a 
cationic-biased proteome would promiscuously interact with all of these exposed biomolecular surfaces. 
Hence, it may come as no surprise that for organisms living at mesophilic pH and salt concentrations, 
proteomes tend to be—on average—more negatively charged89,90. Yet, we know many examples of highly 
cationic proteins in the cell, raising the question of how cells protect themselves from their own. By 
analyzing six model organisms, we indeed find no evidence for selection against positively charged 
proteins (Supplemental text, Fig. S7), despite our data suggesting that polycationic folded and disordered 
proteins  drive cellular toxicity  across  the  kingdoms  of  life. To  better  understand  these  seemingly 
contradictory observations, we performed an integrative bioinformatic analysis showing that while 
proteomes do possess many examples of proteins with a net positive charge, these are either expressed 
at low copy numbers, sequestered from the cellular environment via constitutive binding to anionic 
biomolecules, or neutralized through posttranslational modifications (Supplemental text, Fig. S8-S11, 
Table S3). Remarkably, we find that for essentially every single example of an abundant, positively charged 
protein, its charge is neutralized by a phosphate moiety—either in trans (nucleic acids or phospholipid 
headgroups) or in cis (through phosphorylation). We argue that this neutralization is essential to keep 
endogenous polycationic proteins in check to prevent them from poisoning the cell. Intriguingly, similar 
approaches are used by several human pathogens to neutralize cationic antimicrobial peptides and 
antibiotics91–93.  
The above observations point at a seemingly universal proteome ‘design principle’. The net 
polarity for the large cellular surfaces ensures cellular proteomes do not aspecifically stick to lipids and 
nucleic acids. At the same time, it becomes relatively easy to evolve high-affinity domains that engage 
with these acidic moieties if needed. Cationic surface patches or disordered domains are pervasive 
interaction motifs in the proteome. For example, countless RNA binding proteins possess cationic 
disordered domains adjacent to their folded RNA binding domains27,94,95. Recent work has shown that 
even modest clusters of positively charged residues in IDRs from RNA binding proteins can have a 
profound impact on RNA binding affinity, mirroring our bioinformatic analyses96. Similarly, positively 
charged microtubule-binding proteins, such as tau, do so in part by interacting with the anionic tubulin 
tails that coat the microtubule lattice97. Membrane-binding proteins, like -synuclein, do so via the exact 
same electrostatic interactions98. The use of cationic interaction and targeting motifs in a sea of anionic 
biomolecules is a powerful one but highlights the inherent weakness of cells against killer systems that 
corrupt this principle. It also shows why the cell has a variety of fail-safe mechanisms in place to prevent 
toxicity of its own cationic proteins. When we tested the cationic disordered domains of some human 
nucleic acid binding proteins in isolation, we found they act virtually identical to the killer peptides 
described in this study (Fig. S12). So how does the cell tame these sequences? Above we highlight the role 
that phosphorylation could have in regulating these proteins. Recent studies by us and others have also 
shown that these cationic domains are often paired with anionic or aromatic domains that can potently 
quench or regulate their activity99–103. Additionally, nuclear import factors that bind proteins translated in 
11 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
the cytoplasm via their nuclear localization sequence—usually cationic in nature—were recently shown 
to moonlight as bona fide protein chaperones104–107. Although philosophical, it is worth considering which 
function  came  first  when  transcription  and  translation  became  uncoupled  during  eukaryogenesis: 
chaperoning a condensation-prone protein in an RNA-poor environment (i.e., the cytosol) or translocating 
it to an RNA-rich environment (i.e., the nucleus)? 
  In this study, we provide a simple electrostatics-based framework that unifies the toxicity of 
cationic peptides in human disease and killer peptides in biology. McKnight and co-workers speculated 
that RAN translation of the C9orf72 repeat could be considered the “failed birth of a gene”55. Upon repeat 
expansion, a non-coding part of the genome all of a sudden becomes protein-coding. Yet, the gene 
product is toxic to the cell producing it. When venomous animals evolved their killer peptides, a 
requirement was that the venom did not kill its host. Unsurprisingly, venom peptide production is a tightly 
regulated process often involving extracellular processing and cleavage of quenching domains together 
with signal peptides correctly targeting the protein for secretion. Note that in the lumen of a secretory 
vesicle these peptides never “see” the cytoplasm of the cell they are produced in. With this in mind, one 
can only wonder whether we have witnessed the failed birth of a venom peptide that lacked its regulatory 
sequences.   
12 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: 
We thank all members of the Gitler lab, the Boeynaems lab, the Carnegie-Stanford Intrinsically Disordered 
Protein  Scientific  Interest  Group  (IDPSIG),  IDPseminars,  and  FNZ  for  helpful  discussion  and 
suggestions. We are indebted to Dr. Bede Portz for providing invaluable feedback and insights that helped 
shape this manuscript. We thank the Stanford Neuroscience Microscopy Service for use of the core facility. 
Some of the computing for this project was performed on the Sherlock cluster. We would like to thank 
Stanford University and the Stanford Research Computing Center for providing computational resources 
and support that contributed to these research results. We thank members of the Water and Life Interface 
Institute (WALII), supported by NSF DBI grant # 2213983, for helpful discussions. We thank Dr. Richard 
Kriwacki and Dr. Aaron Phillips (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital) for kindly providing us with 
recombinant NPM1. 
 
 
FUNDING: 
Work in the A.D.G. lab is supported by NIH (grant R35NS097263). A.D.G. is a Chan Zuckerberg Biohub 
Investigator. S.B. acknowledges an EMBO Long Term Fellowship. Work in the S.B. lab is supported by 
CPRIT (RR220094) and NSF (DBI # 2213983, WALII). The Stanford Neuroscience Microscopy Service is 
supported by NIH (grant NS069375). M.A.F.H. is supported by FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa 
do  Estado  de  São  Paulo,  2022/00527-8;  2020/01107-7;  2019/13112-8),  CAPES  (Coordenação  de 
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – 001) and CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento 
Científico e Tecnológico No. 39337/2016-0). The National Center for X-ray Tomography is supported by 
NIH NIGMS (P41GM103445, P30GM138441) and the DOE’s Office of Biological and Environmental 
Research (DE-AC025CH11231). V.Y. and A.C.O. acknowledge an NSF CAREER award (DMR #1848388) for 
support. A.S.H. acknowledges support from the Longer Life Foundation, an RGA/Washington University 
collaboration. 
 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: 
S.B: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing-
Original Draft, Visualization. X.R.M.: Software, Formal Analysis. V.Y.: Investigation, Formal Analysis. G.G.: 
Software, Formal Analysis. JH.C.: Investigation. J.B.: Software, Formal Analysis. L.N.: Investigation. A.S.: 
Investigation, Formal Analysis. A.B.: Investigation. D.VH.: Investigation. J.P.: Investigation. A.E.: Formal 
Analysis. H.B.S: Formal analysis. K.S.: Resources. L.P.: Methodology. K.L.: Methodology, Formal analysis. 
C.L.:  Supervision.  M.A.F.H.:  Methodology.  A.K.:  Supervision.  F.I.:  Methodology,  Supervision.  A.O.: 
Methodology, Supervision. A.S.H.: Methodology, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing-Review & Editing. 
A.D.G.: Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing-Review & Editing. 
 
 
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS: 
A.D.G has served as a consultant for Aquinnah Pharmaceuticals, Prevail Therapeutics, and Third Rock 
Ventures and is a scientific founder of Maze Therapeutics. A.C.O. is a co-founder of Werewool. All other 
13 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
authors declare no competing interests. A.S.H. is a scientific consultant for Dewpoint Therapeutics and on 
the Scientific Advisory Board for Prose Foods.   
14 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
FIGURES 
 
 
 
Figure 1: RNA modulates protein composition of ex vivo PR30 condensates. (A) Scheme indicating 
toxicity of cationic RAN peptides. (B) Cationic RAN peptides drive condensation of U2OS cell lysate. 
Heatmap showing quantification of RNA-dependent solubility for 1324 proteins. (C) Morphology or PR30 
condensates is modulated by exogenous RNA addition (2 µg/µl RNA). (D) Silver stain indicating differential 
protein composition of PR30-induced condensates in response to RNA addition. (E) Heatmap showing 
quantification of RNA-dependent solubility for 1324 proteins. (F) Proteins cluster according to solubility 
responses as a function of RNA concentration. % indicates fraction of total proteins in the cluster. (G) 
Clusters differentially enrich for GO terms relating to subcellular compartments. Font size = -log(p-value). 
(H) Overview indicating that the morphology and composition of PR30 condensates are a function of the 
ratio of RNA concentration over basic protein concentration. All of the highlighted protein assemblies and 
factors  have  been  directly  implicated  in  C9orf72 ALS/FTD  pathogenesis.  3D  reconstructions of PR 
condensates were obtained via soft x-ray tomography. See also Fig. S1.   
15 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure 2: Electrostatic charge is a sequence feature modulating PR30 condensate partitioning. (A) Blue 
proteins are enriched for experimentally validated RNA-binding proteins and cationic amino acids. Red 
proteins have higher acidic amino acid composition. Grey proteins are enriched for neither. (B) On 
average, red proteins are more acidic and blue proteins are more basic compared to grey proteins (left). 
Moreover, on average, blue proteins have more clusters of basic residues in their IDRs (middle), while red 
proteins have more clusters of acidic residues in their folded domains (right) compared to grey proteins 
Kruskal-Wallis. (C) 40S and 60S ribosomal subunits show differential solubility profiles that correlate with 
changes in average pI. Two-way ANOVA and Mann-Whitney. (D) Positive charge clustering on the IDRs of 
DDX helicases correlates with their partitioning response to RNA (change in solubility upon addition of 0.4 
µg/µl RNA. Linear regression. (E) Two example folded proteins with mirrored convex-concave solubility 
curves show opposite surface charge clustering (NAID = negative average inverse distance) and pI. Diablo 
(PDB: 1FEW)108, SnrpD2 (PDB: 1B34)109. See also Fig. S3-4. * p-value < 0.05, ** p-value < 0.01, *** p-value 
< 0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001.    
16 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure 3: Machine learning predicts RNA-modulated phase separation of uncharacterized proteins. (A) 
Scheme illustrating workflow to predict red (concave) vs blue (convex) proteins. (B) The intracellular 
proteome ranked according to normalized confidence scores (Z score). (C) GO categories associated with 
predicted red and blue proteins. (D) Scheme highlighting breakdown of top 10 predicted blue unknown 
proteins. (E) 9 out of 10 predicted blue proteins target membraneless organelles. 8 do so in a manner that 
is dependent on nuclear or cytoplasmic RNA availability (2 µg/ml actinomycin D inhibits all transcription, 
0.5 mM arsenite induces polysome disassembly and increases free cytoplasmic RNA levels). White 
arrowhead indicates nucleolar stress cap targeting of C3orf49. C9orf85 targets nucleoli and stress granules 
17 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
upon arsenite treatment. C19orf47 demixes from nuclear speckles upon transcription inhibition. C4orf50 
condenses into nuclear bodies upon arsenite treatment. C20orf96 forms cytoplasmic bodies unresponsive 
to changes in RNA availability. C4orf54 binds the actin cytoskeleton (see Fig. S5). 
   
18 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure  4:  Killer  peptides  drive  coacervation  of  cellular  components  and  target  biomolecular 
condensates. (A) The intracellular + secreted proteome ranked according to normalized confidence scores 
(Z score). GO categories associated with predicted red and blue proteins. (B) Scheme illustrating LL-37 as 
an AMP. (C) PR20 and LL-37 induce condensation of E. coli lysate. (D) Soft x-ray tomography of sham and 
LL-37-treated E. coli cells. n = nucleoid, c = cytoplasm. (E) Quantification of nucleoid compaction and 
cytoplasmic condensation. Mann-Whitney. ** p-value < 0.01, **** p-value < 0.0001. See also Fig. S6. (F) 
LL-37 condenses both E. coli ribosomes and plasmid DNA. (G) Positive charge is a common feature among 
AMPs. (H-I) Examples of natural AMPs and venom peptides that induce cell lysate condensation. (J) 
Crotamine and PR30 (500 nM) target endogenous biomolecular condensates in human cells. 
   
19 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure 5: Net positive charge is sufficient for protein toxicity. (A) Engineering supercharged GFP versions 
for toxicity assays. (B) Expression of cationic GFP variants drives toxicity in E. coli. One-way ANOVA. (C-D) 
Cationic GFPs condenses with ribosomal proteins in E. coli and the test tube. (E) GFP partitions into 
nucleoli  of  U2OS  cells  in  a  positive  charge-dependent  manner.  One-way  ANOVA.  (F)  Exogenous 
recombinant cationic GFP is taken up, targets nucleoli and kills mouse cortical neurons in the dish. 
Student’s t-test. (G) Cells with low levels of GFP (+) have a normal nuclear organization, whereas high 
levels (+++) perturb nucleoli and heterochromatin. Adjacent cells that did not take up GFP (-) are normal. 
20 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(H) Scheme depicting polycation poisoning in pro- and eukaryote systems. * p-value < 0.05, *** p-value < 
0.001, **** p-value < 0.0001. 
   
21 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Boeynaems et al. (2023): Aberrant phase separation is a common killing strategy 
of positively charged peptides. 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 
Material & Methods 
Supplemental text 
Figs. S1 to S12 
 
OTHER SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL 
Table S1 (Excel): Mass spectrometry data. 
Table S2 (Excel): Machine learning prediction scores. 
Table S3 (Excel): Overview of abundant cationic proteins in model organisms. 
 
   
22 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
MATERIAL & METHODS 
 
EXPERIMENTAL MODELS 
 
Human cell lines 
U2OS (ATCC, HTB-96) cells were grown at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO  for 24 h in 
2
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), high glucose, GlutaMAX + 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) 
and pen/strep (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
 
Bacteria 
E. coli (Stbl3, Thermo Fisher) were grown at 37°C in a shaking incubator in LB medium and used for ex vivo 
and soft x-ray tomography assays. E. coli (NiCo21(DE3), New England Biolabs) transformed with plasmids 
for expression of GFP charge variants were grown at 37 °C in a shaking incubator in LB medium 
supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin. 
 
Mice and primary mouse cells 
All mouse husbandry and procedures were performed in accordance with institutional guidelines and 
approved  by  the  Stanford  Administrative  Panel  on  Animal  Care  (APLAC).  C57BL/6  mice  (Jackson 
Laboratory) were used. Mouse primary cortical neurons were grown in Neurobasal media (Gibco) 
supplemented with B-27 serum-free supplement (Gibco), GlutaMAX, and Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco) 
in a humidified incubator at 37°C, with 5% CO . 
2
 
METHOD DETAILS 
 
Plasmid construction 
All constructs for human expression were generated through custom synthesis and subcloned into a 
pcDNA3.1 backbone by Genscript (Piscataway, USA). All constructs for GFP expression in E. coli were 
generated  through  custom  synthesis  and  subcloned  into  an  expression  backbone  (pETDuet-1)  by 
Genscript (Piscataway, USA), as has been previously reported110. 
 
Peptides 
All peptides were generated via chemical synthesis by Pepscan (Lelystad, the Netherlands), except BMAP-
27 (AS-65598, Anaspec), LL-37 (AS-61302, Anaspec), 5-FAM-LC-LL-37 (AS-63694, Anaspec), Crotamine 
(CRO01-01000, Smartox-Biotech), and Cy3-Crotamine (CRO02-00500, Smartox-Biotech). Peptides were 
fluorescently labeled as described previously 111. 
 
Recombinant proteins 
Recombinant GFP variants 
GFP variants were expressed in E. coli (NiCo21(DE3), NEB) in LB media supplemented with 100 µg/mL 
ampicillin. Overnight cultures were inoculated into 1 L of LB media supplemented with ampicillin and 
allowed to grow at 37 °C to an OD  between 0.8-1.0. At this point, the cultures were induced with 1 mM 
600
IPTG. After induction, cultures were grown at 25 °C with shaking for an additional 16-18 h. At this point, 
cells were collected by centrifugation in a swinging bucket rotor at 4000 rpm for 15 min. The cell pellet 
was resuspended in a lysis buffer (50 mM NaH PO , pH 8.0 supplemented with 300 mM (GFP(-24)) or 1 M 
2 4
23 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
NaCl (GFP(+24))). The cell pellet was then lysed by sonication (2s on, 4 s off) at 60% amplitude using a 0.5 
in probe for 10 min. The insoluble fraction was separated via centrifugation in a fixed angle rotor at 10,000 
rpm for 30 min at 4 °C. The GFP was purified from the soluble fraction using immobilized metal affinity 
chromatography (His-Pur Ni-NTA). The column was washed with lysis buffer containing 50 mM imidazole 
and GFP was eluted with lysis buffer supplemented with 250 mM imidazole. Fractions were collected and 
analyzed by SDS-PAGE for purity. Pure fractions were combined and dialyzed against 10 mM tris buffer, 
pH 7.4 before adjusting the concentration to 1 mg/mL GFP by ultrafiltration using a 10 kDa molecular 
weight cutoff spin filter (Amicon). 
 
In vitro chromatin reconstitution 
Chromatin was reconstituted by salt dialysis as described previously112. Histones for chromatin assembly 
were purified as described previously112–114. pUC19 plasmid DNA containing 19x “601” Widom positioning 
sequence115 (ASP 696) was digested with EcoRI, XbaI, DraI and HaeII (New England Biolabs). 19x 601 array 
was then purified using polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation followed by dialysis into TE buffer (10 mM 
Tris pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EDTA). EcoRI and XbaI 5’ overhangs were filled in with dGTP (New England Biolabs), 
dCTP (New England Biolabs), dTTP (New England Biolabs), and biotin-14-dATP (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
using Large Klenow fragment 3’-5’ exo- (New England Biolabs). Biotinylated 19x 601 array DNA, H2A/H2B 
histone dimer, and H3/H4 tetramer were added to high salt buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 0.25 mM 
EDTA; 2 M NaCl) and gradually dialyzed over the course of ~67 hours at a rate of 0.5 mL/min from 500 mL 
high salt buffer into low salt buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 0.25 mM EDTA; 2.5 mM NaCl). H3/H4 tetramer 
concentrations were titrated to vary chromatin saturation. Nucleosome assembly was verified using 
overnight digestion of chromatin at room temperature using AvaI which cuts between adjacent 601 
positions in the array, followed by a native acrylamide gel shift analysis (gel shift of ~200 bp AvaI digestion 
product to ~600 bp suggests nucleosome positioned on 601 sequences as described previously112). 
 
Recombinant NPM1 
Recombinant NPM was a kind gift from Dr. Richard Kriwacki and Dr. Aaron Phillips (St. Jude Children’s 
Research Hospital). 
 
Human cell culture, treatments and microscopy 
U2OS cells were grown at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5 % CO2 for 24 h in Dulbecco’s Modified 
Eagle’s Medium (DMEM), high glucose, GlutaMAX + 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and pen/strep (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific). Cells were transiently transfected using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells grown on cover slips were fixed for 24 h after transfection 
in 4 % formaldehyde in PBS. For peptide uptake experiments, cells were treated with 1 µM of fluorescently 
labeled peptides and incubated for 45 min at 37°C, followed by a PBS wash and fixation with 4 % 
formaldehyde in PBS. Slides were mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent (Life Technologies). 
Confocal images were obtained using a Zeiss LSM 780 Meta NLO confocal microscope. Images were 
processed and analyzed using Fiji116 and Adobe Photoshop. 
 
Mouse primary neuron culture and microscopy 
Primary mouse cortical neurons were dissociated into single cell suspensions from E16.5 C57BL/6 mice 
(Jackson Laboratory) cortices using a papain dissociation system (Worthington Biochemical Corporation). 
Neurons were seeded onto poly-L-lysine coated plates (0.1% w/v) and grown in Neurobasal media (Gibco) 
24 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
supplemented with B-27 serum-free supplement (Gibco), GlutaMAX, and Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco) 
in a humidified incubator at 37°C, with 5% CO2. Cells were transiently transfected using Lipofectamine 
3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells grown on cover slips were 
fixed for 24 h after transfection in 4 % formaldehyde in PBS. For peptide uptake experiments, cells were 
treated with 1 µM of fluorescently labeled peptides and incubated for 1 h at 37°C, followed by a PBS wash 
and fixation with 4 % formaldehyde in PBS. Slides were mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent 
(Life Technologies). Confocal images were obtained using a Zeiss LSM 780 Meta NLO confocal microscope. 
Images were processed and analyzed using Fiji116 and Adobe Photoshop. 
 
Bacterial culture and microscopy 
E. coli (NiCo21(DE3), New England Biolabs) transformed with plasmids for expression of GFP charge 
variants were grown at 37 °C in a shaking incubator in LB medium supplemented with 100 µg/mL 
ampicillin. For each variant, overnight cultures were prepared by inoculating a single colony from a plate 
into a snapcap tube containing 5 mL of LB media supplemented with ampicillin. After growth overnight, 
the cultures were then diluted to OD  = 0.1 in LB media supplemented with ampicillin and were allowed 
600
to grow at 37 °C with shaking until they reached an OD  of approximately 1.0. The OD  of each culture 
600 600
was then normalized to 0.9 and 200 µL of the culture was then transferred to a 96-well plate for 10-fold 
serial dilutions with LB media supplemented with ampicillin. 5 µL of each culture and dilution (10-107x 
diluted) were spotted onto LB plates supplemented with 100 µg/mL ampicillin with or without 1 mM 
isopropyl -D-1-thiogalacopyranoside (IPTG, Gold Biotechnology). After drying, plates were incubated at 
25 °C for 30 h before imaging on a scanner and transilluminator (Bio-Rad Gel Doc XR+). 
 
For imaging GFP co-localization with ribosomes in E. coli, an rplI-mScarlet fusion was integrated into the 
native genome locus of rplI in the NiCo21(DE3) E. coli strain. This process began with QC101 (MG1655 rplI-
mCherryKanR) cells, which contain a genomically integrated ribosome-mCherry fusion protein and were 
previously used to investigate the localization of ribosomes in E. coli during various phases of cell 
growth117. We received these cells as a gift from the Sanyal lab and amplified the rplI-mCherry_KanR 
cassette via colony PCR using primers, CGAACACGAAGTGAGCTTCC and AAGCAAAACGCCGACCAA, and 
Phusion polymerase as recommended by New England Biolabs (NEB). mCherry was replaced with 
mScarletI for better compatibility with our imaging system. HiFi assembly was used to assemble a vector 
with a rplI-mScarletI_KanR cassette. 
 
Construction of p2-39 rplI-mScarletI_KanR plasmid 
Fragment  Forward Primer  Reverse Primer  DNA template 
p2-39  CATTGGTCGGCGTTTTGC GGAAGCTCACTTCGTGTTCG p2-39 mScarletI 82 
backbone  TTACTTAATTAACGGCAC AGAACCCCGCATATGTATAT
TCC  C 
rplI- CGAACACGAAGTGAGCT ATCACAGCTTCTCCTTTACTT rplI-mCherry_KanR 
upstream  TCC  TCAGCTACTACGTTTACG  cassette 
homology 
mScarletI  AGTAAAGGAGAAGCTGT TTTGTATAGTTCATCCATGCC p2-39 mScarletI 82 
GATTAAAGAGTTC  ACCG 
25 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Kan- GCATGGATGAACTATAC AAGCAAAACGCCGACCAA  rplI-mCherry_KanR 
downstream  AAATAAGAATTCAAACA cassette 
homology  GTAATACAAG 
 
All fragments were PCR purified (NEB), ligated using NEB HiFi assembly kit, transformed into NEB5 cells 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and plated onto LB agar plates supplemented with 25 µg/mL 
chloramphenicol and 50 µg/mL kanamycin. Single colonies were inoculated into LB media supplemented 
with chloramphenicol and kanamycin and grown at 37 °C overnight with shaking. Plasmid DNA was 
isolated from overnight cultures using the Qiagen Spin Miniprep Kit and plasmid sequences were verified 
by Genewiz. 
The dsDNA cassette for genomic integration was amplified from the p2-39 rplI-mScarletI_KanR plasmid 
using primers, CGAACACGAAGTGAGCTTCC and AAGCAAAACGCCGACCAA. The PCR-amplified product was 
treated with DpnI, PCR purified, and verified by gel electrophoresis. 
To prepare cells for genomic integration, electrocompetent NiCo21(DE3) cells (NEB) were prepared and 
transformed with 50 ng pTKRED. pTKRED was a gift from Edward Cox and Thomas Kuhlman (Addgene 
plasmid # 41062)118. Briefly, overnight cultures of NiCo21(DE3) cells were diluted 100-fold in LB media and 
grown at 37 °C, 225 rpm until OD  = 0.35-0.4. Cells were then incubated on ice for 10-20 min and 
600
centrifuged at 400 rcf for 10 min at 4 °C. Cells were washed twice in ice cold sterile milliQ water and then 
washed once in ice cold 10% glycerol before resuspending in ice cold 10% glycerol, aliquoting, and snap 
freezing with liquid nitrogen. 
Electrocompetent NiCo21(DE3) cells were transformed with pTKRED using a MicroPulser Electroporator 
(Bio-Rad). 1 µL plasmid was added to 100 µL electrocompetent cells in a chilled Gene Pulser/MicroPulser 
electroporation cuvette with 0.1 cm gap (Bio-Rad) and incubated on ice for 1 min. Cells were then 
subjected to a single pulse and were then recovered in SOC media at 30 °C with shaking for 3 h. A portion 
of the recovered cells was then plated on LB plates supplemented with 50 µg/mL spectinomycin and 
incubated at 30 °C overnight. Single colonies were inoculated into LB media supplemented with 100 µg/mL 
spectinomycin and the presence of the plasmid was confirmed by sequencing (Genewiz). 
Electrocompetent  pTKRED  NiCo21(DE3)  cells  were  prepared.  Cells  were  grown  in  SOB  media 
supplemented with 0.5% glucose, 100 µg/mL spectinomycin, and 2 mM IPTG at 30 °C. Cells were then 
harvested as described above when OD  = 0.5 – 0.6. 1 µg of the dsDNA rplI-mScarletI-KanR cassette was 
600
added to 100 µL electrocompetent cells, and electroporation was performed as described above. Cells 
were recovered in 1 mL SOC media for 3 h at 30 °C with shaking and 250 µL of electroporated cells were 
plated onto LB agar plates supplemented with 100 µg/mL spectinomycin and 25 µg/mL kanamycin118. 
Plates were incubated at 30 °C for 1-2 days. Single colonies were selected and grown in LB media 
supplemented with 25 µg/mL kanamycin and incubated at 42 °C with shaking for approximately 20 h 
before they were diluted and spread onto LB plates supplemented with 25 µg/mL kanamycin. Plates were 
incubated overnight at 37 °C. We verified that these colonies did not grow on LB plates with spectinomycin 
at 30 °C, indicating that the pTKRED plasmid had been cured. Additionally, we performed colony PCR with 
primers  upstream  (CGCCATCAGTAATCGGTCA)  and  downstream  (CGCGAAGTTCTTCCACGAT)  of  the 
cassette, confirming successfully integration into the E. coli genome. 
26 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Chemically competent rplI-mScarletI_KanR NiCo21(DE3) cells were prepared and transformed with a 
plasmid encoding each GFP variant. Briefly, overnight cultures were diluted 100-fold and grown to OD  
600
= 0.3 -0.4 at 37 °C. At this point, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 2500 rcf for 10 min at 4 °C in a 
cold fixed angle rotor. The pellet was washed once in ice-cold transformation buffer (10 mM PIPES, 15 
mM CaCl , 250 mM KCl, 55 mM MnCl , pH 6.7) and DMSO was added dropwise to a final concentration of 
2 2
7%. Competent cells were aliquoted and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. 2 µL of GFP plasmid (GFP(-18) or 
GFP(+18))82 was added to 100 µL chemically competent cells. Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, heat 
shocked at 42 °C for 30 s, and incubated on ice for 5 min. Cells were recovered in 200 µL SOC for 1 h at 37 
°C and 100 µL of this mixture was plated onto LB plates supplemented with 50 µg/mL kanamycin and 100 
µg/mL ampicillin. Cells were grown overnight at 37 °C. 
For each variant, cultures were grown as above until they reached an OD  between 0.8-1.0. At this point 
600
GFP expression was induced by the addition of 1 mM IPTG and the cultures were grown at 25 °C with 
shaking. Protein expression was induced for 24 h and then cells were imaged on agarose pads using a 
100X oil 1.40 NA UPlanSApo objective (Olympus) on GFP (  = 470-522 nm;   = 525-550 nm; EVOS GFP 
ex em
light cube) and Texas Red (  = 585-629 nm;   = 628-632 nm; EVOS Texas Red light cube) channels using 
ex em
an  EVOS  FL  Auto  2  inverted  fluorescence  microscope.  Raw  microscopy  images  were  background 
subtracted (rolling ball algorithm with 100 pixel radius) in ImageJ. 
 
Immunofluorescence 
U2OS cells and primary neurons were fixed 24h after transfection (or after 45 min – 1 h of peptide 
treatment) in 4% formaldehyde in PBS and stained according standard protocols. Following primary 
antibodies were used: G3BP1 (ab56574, Abcam), H3K9me3 (ab8898, Abcam), SON (NBP1-88706, Novus 
Biologicals), FIBL (ab4566, Abcam), NPM1 (ab10530, Abcam), PABPC (ab21060, Abcam), FLAG (F7425 and 
F1804, Sigma-Aldrich). Alexa-labeled secondary antibodies were used (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
 
Neurotoxicity assays 
Five days after seeding the neurons, recombinant GFP mutants were added at a concentration of 3 µM 
for 24h. Cytotoxicity in primary neuron cultures was measured with an alamarBlue cell viability (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific),  according  to manufacturer’s  instructions.  Readout  was measured using  a  SPARK 
Multimode microplate  reader  (Tecan  Life  Sciences).  Data was  analyzed  using  Microsoft  Excel  and 
GraphPad Prism. 
 
Peptide coacervation experiments 
Peptide experiments were performed as described previously with slight modifications 111. In brief, 
peptides were generated via chemical synthesis by Pepscan (Lelystad, the Netherlands). Peptides were 
dissolved in milli-Q water and stored at -20°C. To test for coacervation, peptides were diluted in human 
or E. coli cell lysate at the indicated concentrations in PBS at pH 7.4. NPM1 phase separation assays were 
done as described in 56. Nucleosome arrays, plasmid DNA or E. coli ribosomes (New England Biolabs) were 
added at a concentration of 200 ng/µl and 1 µg/µl, respectively. Samples were transferred to an imaging 
chamber (Grace Bio-Labs, Bend, USA) and imaged on a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope. Pictures of 
turbid solutions in PCR strips were taken using a Google Pixel 3a. 
 
PR protein precipitation 
27 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
U2OS cells were trypsinized (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and harvested by centrifugation. Cell pellets were 
washed three times with ice-cold PBS. Pellets were redissolved in PBS buffer with Halt Protease inhibitor 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and lysed using a probe sonicator (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific) on ice. 
The lysate was cleared from the insoluble fraction by centrifugation for 15 min at 10,000 rpm at 4°C. The 
supernatant was retrieved and the procedure was repeated until no pellet was visible after centrifugation. 
The  protein  concentration  was  measured  using  Micro  BCA  assay  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific).  PR30 
(Pepscan, The Netherlands) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM to 0.5 mg of soluble lysate in a 
total volume of 400 µl and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. The volume of the samples was 
increased to 1 ml with PBS, before gently spinning down the PR droplets at 4,000 rpm for 5 min. The 
supernatans was transferred to a new tube. Pellets were subsequently washed with 1 ml PBS and vortexed 
before spinning down again. Washing steps were repeated three times. To each pellet a volume of buffer 
corresponding to the supernatans was added. The resulting samples were processed for LC-MS/MS. 
Samples for analysis by silver staining were generated identically. Silver staining (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
 
Proteomics sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis 
Proteins in the supernatant and pellet samples were first reduced by addition of DTT to a concentration 
of 5 mM and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a 
concentration of 10 mM for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 
mM Tris pH 7.9 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg lysyl endopeptidase 
(Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were further diluted with 50 mM Tris pH 7.9 pH 8.0 to 
a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) 
overnight at 37˚C. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were 
first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in 
water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was 
washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 750 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA 
in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). Purified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at 
−20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. 
Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, 
v/v)) of which 2.5 µl (supernatant) or 5 µl (pellet) was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 
RSLC nanoLC in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 
min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 
μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) and the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-
house, 75 µm I.D. x 400 mm length, 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with 
loading solvent A and were separated with a non-linear 145 min gradient from 2% to 56% MS solvent B 
(0.1% FA in water/ACN 20:80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% 
MS solvent B and re-equilibration with 98% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). 
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between 
MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra 
(375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a 
target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 (minimum AGC of 
1,000) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The C-trap was filled at a 
target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a 
28 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge 
states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s. 
QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project119. 
 
Protein identification and quantification 
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using the Andromeda search engine with 
default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM and protein level. The spectra of 
all LC-MS/MS runs were interrogated against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot Proteome database 
(database  release  version  of  January  2018  containing  20,243  human  protein  sequences, 
(http://www.uniprot.org)). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 
ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, 
also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications 
were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between 
runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 
minutes.  Only  proteins  with  at  least  one  unique  or  razor  peptide  were  retained  leading  to  the 
identification of 1599 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the 
MaxQuant  software.  A  minimum  ratio  count  of  two  unique  or  razor  peptides  was  required  for 
quantification. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange 
Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD040619. 
 
Soft X-ray tomography 
PR30 (Pepscan, The Netherlands) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM to 0.5 mg of soluble lysate 
in a total volume of 400 µl and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were subsequently 
loaded in thin-wall glass capillaries and rapidly frozen into liquid nitrogen cooled liquid propane. The 
specimens were imaged by XM-2, a soft x-ray microscope in the National Center for X-ray tomography 
(http://ncxt.org) located at the Advanced Light Source of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (ALS, 
LBNL). The x-ray microscope operates at the “water-window” region of soft x-rays, providing natural 
contrast of biomolecules with respect to water. The condenser and objective lenses, chosen for this 
experiment, guaranteed isotropic 32nm voxel size120,121. For 3D reconstructions, 92 projection images, 
with 200-300 ms exposure time each, were acquired sequentially around a rotation axis with 2° increment 
angles. After normalization and alignment, tomographic reconstructions were calculated using iterative 
reconstruction methods122. The segmentation and visualization of multi-droplets was done based on 
linear attenuation coefficient of x-rays in Amira 6.3.0. 
 
Clustering and machine learning 
To group proteins according to their relative solubility profiles, we used both the three experimental 
solubility values and calculated the change in solubility between 0 and 0.4, and 0.4 and 2. These delta 
values were then clustered at several different k values using the kmeans algorithm. Aggregate solubilities 
were plotted and visualized, and k=9 was selected based on a high level of intra-cluster concordance and 
specificity of GO enrichment. 
UniRep had been demonstrated to be an effective model to extract fundamental features of 
amino-acid sequences that are structurally, evolutionarily and biophysically grounded64. We obtained the 
UniRep average hidden state representations of the entire human proteome (UP000005640_9606) using 
the 256-unit model. We then set aside the proteins in the mass spec experiment to train a support vector 
29 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
machine model with a linear kernel (sklean.svn.SVC) that was able to distinguish blue from grey+red 
proteins. The mass spec proteins were randomly split into 80-20 train-validation sets. We then classified 
the rest of the proteome using the trained model, and the confidence scores were used to rank the 
proteins in each category. 
Since we performed the mass spectrometry experiments on soluble cell lysate without the 
addition of detergents—to avoid any effects of the detergent on condensation—our input sample was 
strongly depleted from membrane proteins. Nonetheless, as can be seen in the GO analysis of cluster 9, 
we got a small membrane contaminant fraction specifically in the blue class of proteins. This makes sense 
as these membrane proteins were insoluble in all conditions of the experiment due to the lack of 
detergent, leading the algorithm to rank membrane proteins incorrectly with high blue scores. Therefore, 
we excluded all membrane bound proteins from our prediction analyses as our experimental setup was 
not designed to study the phase behavior of this class of proteins. 
 
Charge clustering metric  
The charge clustering metric implemented here was developed and adapted from an inverse weighted 
distance metric, which was originally developed in the context of clustering of aromatic residues63. This 
metric  quantifies  the  clustering  of  target  amino  acids  relative  to  other  target  residues,  and  is 
complimentary, yet distinct, from other current charge distribution metrics59. While other metrics 
quantify the relative patterning of charged residues, our focus here is not on the patterning of residues 
relative to charged residues being evenly distributed, but instead on identifying folded domains or 
disordered regions where positively or negatively charged residues are clustered together, regardless of 
the presence of well-mixed regions elsewhere in the same protein. The IWD metric also enables the same 
functional form to be used for folded domains and disordered regions. To adapt the clustering in the 
context of charge residues, a net-charge per residue (NCPR) is calculated for all charged residues using a 
sliding window of five residues. Next, positively charged or negatively charged residues are selected as so-
called target residues. Then the NCPR of each target residue is weighted by the sum of the inverse 
distances between all pairs of other target residues for each residue (Fig. S3). To calculate a single value 
for the sequence an average across the target residues is computed. In the positive charge clustering, the 
target residues are the “true” positively charged (arginine and lysine) residues, where “true positive” here 
means the net charge of the residue is positive, as determined by the sliding-window NCPR. Conversely, 
in the negative charge clustering, the target residues are the “true” negatively charged residues (aspartic 
acid and glutamic acid) residues, where “true negative” again means the net charge of the residue is 
negative as determined by the sliding window NCPR.  
 
To calculate the bivariate-charge clustering, a metric which reports on how well interspersed the positive 
and negative residues are relative to each other, the target residues are both true positive and true 
negative residues (again where ‘true’ here reflects the use of the sliding window NCPR). Clustering is then 
calculated only between pairs of opposite charge residues. The sum of the inverse distance between all 
pairs of oppositely charged target residues is then weighted by the absolute value of the difference in 
NCPR between target residues in the pair. In the IDRs, inverse distance is calculated in linear sequence 
space, while for the surface of folded domains inverse distance is calculated in cartesian space123. 
 
Enrichment of protein sequence feature calculation. 
30 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
The protein sequence analysis was conducted using SHEPHARD, a Python-based framework designed for 
integrating  and  analyzing  large-scale  amino  acid  sequence  properties124.  IDRs  were  predicted  and 
annotated using metapredict (V2)125. Protein structures for folded domains were taken from AlphaFold2 
structure predictions126. The folded domain structures were analyzed to calculate the per-residue solvent-
accessible surface area using SOURSOP and the 3D position of solvent-accessible residues were used to 
calculate 3D charge clustering (see above)127. Sparrow (https://github.com/idptools/sparrow) was used 
to calculate the sequence features for both IDRs and folded domains. While our analysis focused on 
charged residue clustering, we performed a full analysis of different sequence features to perform an 
unbiased screen to identify features that delineated grey, red, and blue class proteins. To determine which 
sequence features were most discriminatory in separating the three groups, an enrichment test was 
conducted comparing a given feature’s values to the whole dataset. To evaluate how well correlated a 
specific sequence feature is with a given class, a linear-discriminant analysis (LDA) was conducted. The 
weight coefficients from the LDA were then used to inform how well correlated a specific sequence 
feature was with a given group. This was conducted for both sequence features on the surface of the 
folded domains and in the IDRs.  
 
Bioinformatics analysis of protein abundance 
Protein  abundance  analyses  (Fig.  S7–11)  were  performed  using  SHEPHARD124  and  sparrow 
(https://github.com/idptools/sparrow).  Mass  spectrometry  data  were  obtained  for  humans128,  X. 
laevis129, A. thaliana130, E. coli131, S. pombe132, and S. cerevisiae133. Phosphorylation data for the human 
proteome was obtained from ProteomeScout134. All data and code for this analysis are provided at 
https://github.com/holehouse-lab/supportingdata/tree/master/2023/boeynaems_2023. 
 
Peptide charge calculation 
Peptide  charge  as  a  function  of  pH  was  calculated  using  Protein  Calculator  v3.4 
(http://protcalc.sourceforge.net/). 
 
GO enrichment analysis 
Go enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID135. Enriched terms are depicted in word clouds with 
font size correlated to -log(p-value). P-values were Bonferroni corrected. 
 
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 
All data was analyzed using Graphpad Prism 8.4.1 and Excel. Statistical tests, p values, number of samples, 
replicates, and experiments are indicated in the figure legends.   
31 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
SUPPLEMENTAL TEXT 
 
Proteome-wide net charge analysis 
We and others have previously indicated that proteomes tend to be—on average—more negatively 
charged89,90,136. We confirmed this conclusion in six different model organisms (Fig. S7). Since our work 
thus far suggests that polycationic folded and disordered proteins drive cellular toxicity across the 
kingdoms of life, one might expect a strong selection against positively charged proteins at the proteome 
level. To our surprise, bioinformatic analysis of these six different model organisms found little obvious 
evidence of this signature, with approximately equal numbers of positively and negatively charged 
proteins, despite the modest trend towards negatively charged proteins (Fig. S7). Yet, an implicit 
assumption in these analyses is that all proteins are equally abundant, which is obviously false. Using 
previously published quantitative mass-spectrometry data, we used the per-protein copy numbers to re-
assess our analysis. Focusing on the set of proteins that comprise the top 85% of all proteins in a cell by 
abundance, we re-analyzed our proteomes using the overall biomolecular mass (i.e., copy number times 
protein molecular weight) (Fig. S8). We took this mass-weighted approach because we reasoned that 
poisons are intrinsically dose-dependent, such that we should expect an effect to depend on the overall 
mass of polycations, not simply the number of molecules. Our analysis identified 1063 highly abundant 
proteins, of which 154 (~15%) had a net positive charge above +0.05. Of these polycationic proteins, 75% 
were histones or ribosomal proteins, 8% were membrane proteins, 6% were constitutive components of 
ribonucleoprotein bodies (e.g., the nucleolus, the spliceosome, or the signal recognition particle), and the 
remaining 11% were nuclear RNA- or zinc-binding proteins (Fig. S9, Table S3). A key feature of these 
proteins is that none exist as soluble cytosolic proteins; all but 24 are constitutively sequestered in 
assemblies with either nucleic acids (ribosomal proteins or histones) or phospholipids (membrane 
proteins). The remaining 24 (zinc-binding proteins, RNA-binding proteins, and nuclear body proteins) also 
undergo extensive phosphorylation. On average, these 24 proteins have one phosphosite for every ten 
residues, five times more than expected by random chance (Fig. S10). In short, we find for essentially 
every single example of an abundant, positively charged protein, that its charge is neutralized by a 
phosphate  moiety—either  in  trans  (nucleic  acids  or  phospholipid  headgroups)  or  in  cis  (through 
phosphorylation). 
To examine the generality of this finding, we extended our analysis across five other model 
organisms (A. thaliana, X. laevis, S. pombe, S. cerevisiae, and E. coli). In all five cases, the same trends held 
true, with almost no examples of abundant free cytosolic positively charged proteins identified (Fig. S11, 
Table S3). Taken together, our integrative bioinformatic analysis suggests that while proteomes do 
possess many examples of proteins with a net positive charge, these are either expressed at low copy 
numbers, sequestered from the cellular environment via constitutive binding to anionic biomolecules, or 
neutralized through phosphorylation.   
32 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURES 
 
 
 
Figure S1: Disease-related basic repeat peptides target biomolecular condensates. (A) QAGR + lysate 
condensates are modulated by RNA addition (2 µg/µl). (B) PR + lysate mixtures with (1) no, (2) 0.4 and (3) 
2µg/µl of RNA added. (C) Silver stain of condensate fraction highlighting position of the three mixtures. 
Same picture as in Fig. 1. (D) Quantification of total condensate fraction. (E-F) Example solubility profiles 
of red and blue protein families. Colored lines indicate individual proteins, black lines indicate family 
average. (G-H) Solubility profiles can be broken down in solubility steps. Δ1 indicates the first solubility 
step (i.e., response to the addition of 0.4 µg/µl RNA) and has opposite values for blue versus red clusters 
33 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(convex vs concave profiles). Different protein classes enrich for high or low Δ1 values in our data set. 
GSEA analysis137, NES = normalized enrichment score. 
   
34 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure S2: Disease-related basic repeat peptides target biomolecular condensates. (A) mCherry-tagged 
PR100, GR100 and QAGR50 target nucleoli in mouse primary cortical neurons. (B) PR30, GR30 and 
QAGR15 peptides phase separate with NPM1 in vitro. (C) mCherry-tagged PR100 and QAGR50, but not 
GR100, target heterochromatin in primary cortical neurons. (D) PR30, GR30 and QAGR15 peptides 
condense nucleosome arrays in vitro. This shows that despite GR can engage with chromatin in the test 
tube, in cells it seems to prefer other compartments. 
   
35 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
 
Figure S3: Overview of our computational approach for calculating charge clustering. 
   
36 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
37 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
Figure S4: Enrichment and correlation of sequence features in different clusters. The upper heat map 
shows the fold enrichment of sequence features, while the bottom heatmap reports on the correlation of 
the sequence feature with the cluster (coefficients of linear discriminants as calculated from an LDA). In 
both heatmaps, each column denotes a cluster with blue clusters on the left and red clusters on the right, 
and each row denotes a different sequence feature. Sequence features are grouped by features calculated 
using residues in just the IDRs, features calculated based on residues on the surface of the folded domains, 
and features calculated on the entire protein sequence. The magnitude of the LDA coefficients in the 
bottom heatmap describe how well correlative a feature is with each cluster, while the sign of the 
coefficient denotes correlation (negative coefficients describe non-correlative features and do not inform 
on anti-correlation).    
38 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure  S5:  C4orf54  is  an  actin-binding  protein.  Expression  of  C4orf54-FLAG  in  U2OS  cells  shows 
colocalization with the actin cytoskeleton (phalloidin staining). C4orf54 forms shells around condensed 
actin after treatment with latrunculin A. 
   
39 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
 
Figure S6: LL-37 and HTN3. (A) Molecular density (reported as the X-ray linear absorption coefficient or 
LAC)  distribution  of  individual  E.  coli  cells  imaged  with  soft  x-ray  tomography  shows  increase  in 
heterogeneity upon LL-37 treatment (i.e., wider distribution). This change in heterogeneity is observed 
for both nucleus and cytoplasm. Mann-Whitney. **** p-value < 0.0001. (B) HTN3 only drives ex vivo 
condensate formation under conditions similar to those of saliva (i.e., mildly acidic). Under these 
conditions HTN3 gains +3 net charge, while LL-37 retains the same charge. 
   
40 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
41 
 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure S7: Proteome-wide analysis for six different organisms reveals a small bias towards negatively 
charged proteins, yet many examples of positively charged proteins exist. This analysis examined (A) 
Homo  sapiens  (n=20,393),  (B)  Arabidopsis  thaliana  (n=39,319),  (C)  Xenopus  laevis  (n=49,880),  (D) 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (n=6,060), (E) Schizosccharomyces pombe (n=5,122), and (F) Escherichia coli 
(n=4,438). In all cases, there are approximately an equal number of proteins with a net positive charge as 
a net negative charge. Proteins with a net charge per residue above 0.10 or below –0.10 are identified as 
individual markers, while all other proteins are reported as contour density data. Marginal distributions 
for the net charge per residue (NCPR) and fraction of charged residues (FCR) are shown alongside the two-
dimensional distributions. 
   
42 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure S8: Quantitative mass-spectrometry data from Hein et al.128 provides copy number information for 
9,209 proteins. We rank-ordered those proteins by most to least abundant and took the set of proteins 
that comprise the top 85% of proteins in a human cell by copy number. This ensures our analysis only 
focuses on a subset of proteins that are found in high abundance (i.e., in human cells, ~10,000 copies or 
more). This same approach was used to select high-abundance proteins across five other organisms. 
   
43 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
 
 
Figure S9: Assessment of highly abundant proteins across the human. (A) Of the 1063 highly abundant 
proteins identified, just 153 have a net positive charge, and of those, the majority (~90%) are sequestered 
in constitutive molecular complexes with RNA (ribosomal proteins, RNP proteins), DNA (histones) or 
phospholipids (membrane proteins). The remaining proteins are nuclear RNA-binding proteins. (B) Same 
data as shown in panel A with histones and ribosomal proteins explicitly labelled for convenience.  
   
44 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
Figure S10: The expected phosphosite density was generated by randomly selecting 24 proteins and 
calculating the average phosphosite density (number of residues that possess phosphosites / total 
number of residues) 5000 times with replacement to construct a null distribution. This null distribution 
gives an expected average phosphosite density of 0.02 (i.e., one in every fifty residues is phosphorylated). 
The value and the associated distribution can be compared with the actual phosphosite density for the 24 
non-RNP/membrane-bound proteins identified from our 153 highly abundant positively charged human 
proteins. The phosphosite density for these 24 proteins is 0.94, or one in every ten residues. 
 
 
 
45 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure S11: Analysis of abundant, positively charged proteins across the tree of life consistently identifies 
positively charged proteins as histones, ribosomal proteins, membrane proteins, or proteins engaged as 
parts of ribonuclear protein (RNP) complexes (see Table S3). 
   
46 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
 
 
Figure S12: Endogenous cationic IDRs show similar behavior to disease ones when in isolation. (A) Key 
proteins from several RNA-centric condensates (B) RNA-centric condensates are enriched in arginine-rich 
motifs (fraction of proteins with at least four motifs138). Circle size indicated percentage of proteins with 
arginine-rich motif. Color indicated fold enrichment. (C) Example cationic IDRs from key condensate 
proteins. (D) These condensate proteins all colocalize with PR when expressed in cells. (E) Isolated cationic 
IDR peptides form irregular gel-like condensates when added to cell lysate, but are modulated into more 
spherical assemblies upon addition of RNA (2 µg/µl). 
   
47 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
REFERENCES 
1.  Malik, I., Kelley, C.P., Wang, E.T., and Todd, P.K. (2021). Molecular mechanisms underlying nucleotide 
repeat expansion disorders. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 589–607. 
2.  Depienne, C., and Mandel, J.-L. (2021). 30 years of repeat expansion disorders: What have we learned 
and what are the remaining challenges? Am. J. Hum. Genet. 108, 764–785. 
3.  Lieberman, A.P., Shakkottai, V.G., and Albin, R.L. (2019). Polyglutamine repeats in neurodegenerative 
diseases. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 14, 1–27. 
4.  Boivin, M., and Charlet-Berguerand, N. (2022). Trinucleotide CGG repeat diseases: An expanding field 
of polyglycine proteins? Front. Genet. 13, 843014. 
5.  Hughes, J.N., and Thomas, P.Q. (2013). Molecular pathology of polyalanine expansion disorders: new 
perspectives from mouse models. Methods Mol. Biol. 1017, 135–151. 
6.  Hagerman, R.J., Berry-Kravis, E., Hazlett, H.C., Bailey, D.B., Moine, H., Kooy, R.F., Tassone, F., Gantois, 
I., Sonenberg, N., Mandel, J.L., et al. (2017). Fragile X syndrome. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 3, 
1–19. 
7.  Lanni, S., and Pearson, C.E. (2019). Molecular genetics of congenital myotonic dystrophy. Neurobiol. 
Dis. 132, 104533. 
8.  Li,  L.-B.,  Yu,  Z.,  Teng,  X.,  and  Bonini,  N.M.  (2008).  RNA  toxicity  is  a  component  of  ataxin-3 
degeneration in Drosophila. Nature 453, 1107–1111. 
9.  Castro, A.F., Loureiro, J.R., Bessa, J., and Silveira, I. (2020). Antisense transcription across nucleotide 
repeat expansions in neurodegenerative and neuromuscular diseases: Progress and mysteries. Genes 
(Basel) 11, 1418. 
10.  Cleary, J.D., Pattamatta, A., and Ranum, L.P.W. (2018). Repeat-associated non-ATG (RAN) translation. 
J. Biol. Chem. 293, 16127–16141. 
11.  Renton, A.E., Majounie, E., Waite, A., Simón-Sánchez, J., Rollinson, S., Gibbs, J.R., Schymick, J.C., 
Laaksovirta, H., van Swieten, J.C., Myllykangas, L., et al. (2011). A hexanucleotide repeat expansion 
in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72, 257–268. 
12.  DeJesus-Hernandez, M., Mackenzie,  I.R.,  Boeve,  B.F.,  Boxer,  A.L., Baker,  M.,  Rutherford,  N.J., 
Nicholson, A.M., Finch, N.A., Flynn, H., Adamson, J., et al. (2011). Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide 
repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72, 245–
256. 
13.  Liu, E.Y., Russ, J., Wu, K., Neal, D., Suh, E., McNally, A.G., Irwin, D.J., Van Deerlin, V.M., and Lee, E.B. 
(2014).  C9orf72  hypermethylation  protects  against  repeat  expansion-associated  pathology  in 
ALS/FTD. Acta Neuropathol. 128, 525–541. 
14.  Boivin, M., Pfister, V., Gaucherot, A., Ruffenach, F., Negroni, L., Sellier, C., and Charlet-Berguerand, 
N. (2020). Reduced autophagy upon C9ORF72 loss synergizes with dipeptide repeat protein toxicity 
in G4C2 repeat expansion disorders. EMBO J. 39, e100574. 
15.  Shi, Y., Lin, S., Staats, K.A., Li, Y., Chang, W.-H., Hung, S.-T., Hendricks, E., Linares, G.R., Wang, Y., Son, 
E.Y., et al. (2018). Haploinsufficiency leads to neurodegeneration in C9ORF72 ALS/FTD human 
induced motor neurons. Nat. Med. 24, 313–325. 
16.  Burberry, A., Suzuki, N., Wang, J.-Y., Moccia, R., Mordes, D.A., Stewart, M.H., Suzuki-Uematsu, S., 
Ghosh, S., Singh, A., Merkle, F.T., et al. (2016). Loss-of-function mutations in the C9ORF72 mouse 
ortholog cause fatal autoimmune disease. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 347ra93-347ra93. 
17.  Zu, T., Liu, Y., Bañez-Coronel, M., Reid, T., Pletnikova, O., Lewis, J., Miller, T.M., Harms, M.B., 
Falchook, A.E., Subramony, S.H., et al. (2013). RAN proteins and RNA foci from antisense transcripts 
in C9ORF72 ALS and frontotemporal dementia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, E4968-77. 
18.  Ash,  P.E.A.,  Bieniek,  K.F.,  Gendron,  T.F.,  Caulfield,  T.,  Lin,  W.-L.,  Dejesus-Hernandez,  M.,  van 
Blitterswijk, M.M., Jansen-West, K., Paul, J.W., 3rd, Rademakers, R., et al. (2013). Unconventional 
48 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
translation of C9ORF72 GGGGCC expansion generates insoluble polypeptides specific to c9FTD/ALS. 
Neuron 77, 639–646. 
19.  Mori, K., Weng, S.-M., Arzberger, T., May, S., Rentzsch, K., Kremmer, E., Schmid, B., Kretzschmar, 
H.A., Cruts, M., Van Broeckhoven, C., et al. (2013). The C9orf72 GGGGCC repeat is translated into 
aggregating dipeptide-repeat proteins in FTLD/ALS. Science 339, 1335–1338. 
20.  Schmitz,  A.,  Pinheiro  Marques,  J.,  Oertig,  I.,  Maharjan,  N.,  and  Saxena,  S.  (2021).  Emerging 
perspectives on dipeptide repeat proteins in C9ORF72 ALS/FTD. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 15, 637548. 
21.  Freibaum, B.D., and Taylor, J.P. (2017). The Role of Dipeptide Repeats in C9ORF72-Related ALS-FTD. 
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 10, 35. 
22.  Odeh, H.M., and Shorter, J. (2020). Arginine-rich dipeptide-repeat proteins as phase disruptors in C9-
ALS/FTD. Emerg. Top. Life Sci. 4, 293–305. 
23.  Mizielinska, S., Grönke, S., Niccoli, T., Ridler, C.E., Clayton, E.L., Devoy, A., Moens, T., Norona, F.E., 
Woollacott, I.O.C., Pietrzyk, J., et al. (2014). C9orf72 repeat expansions cause neurodegeneration in 
Drosophila through arginine-rich proteins. Science 345, 1192–1194. 
24.  Boeynaems, S., Bogaert, E., Michiels, E., Gijselinck, I., Sieben, A., Jovičić, A., De Baets, G., Scheveneels, 
W., Steyaert, J., Cuijt, I., et al. (2016). Drosophila screen connects nuclear transport genes to DPR 
pathology in c9ALS/FTD. Sci. Rep. 6, 20877. 
25.  Jovičić, A., Mertens, J., Boeynaems, S., Bogaert, E., Chai, N., Yamada, S.B., Paul, J.W., 3rd, Sun, S., 
Herdy,  J.R.,  Bieri,  G.,  et  al.  (2015).  Modifiers  of  C9orf72  dipeptide  repeat  toxicity  connect 
nucleocytoplasmic transport defects to FTD/ALS. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1226–1229. 
26.  Freibaum, B.D., Lu, Y., Lopez-Gonzalez, R., Kim, N.C., Almeida, S., Lee, K.-H., Badders, N., Valentine, 
M., Miller, B.L., Wong, P.C., et al. (2015). GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9orf72 compromises 
nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature 525, 129–133. 
27.  Boeynaems, S., Bogaert, E., Kovacs, D., Konijnenberg, A., Timmerman, E., Volkov, A., Guharoy, M., De 
Decker, M., Jaspers, T., Ryan, V.H., et al. (2017). Phase separation of C9orf72 dipeptide repeats 
perturbs stress granule dynamics. Mol. Cell 65, 1044-1055.e5. 
28.  Lee, K.-H., Zhang, P., Kim, H.J., Mitrea, D.M., Sarkar, M., Freibaum, B.D., Cika, J., Coughlin, M., 
Messing, J., Molliex, A., et al. (2016). C9orf72 dipeptide repeats impair the assembly, dynamics, and 
function of membrane-less organelles. Cell 167, 774-788.e17. 
29.  Lopez-Gonzalez, R., Lu, Y., Gendron, T.F., Karydas, A., Tran, H., Yang, D., Petrucelli, L., Miller, B.L., 
Almeida, S., and Gao, F.-B. (2016). Poly(GR) in C9ORF72-related ALS/FTD compromises mitochondrial 
function and increases oxidative stress and DNA damage in iPSC-derived motor neurons. Neuron 92, 
383–391. 
30.  Fumagalli, L., Young, F.L., Boeynaems, S., De Decker, M., Mehta, A.R., Swijsen, A., Fazal, R., Guo, W., 
Moisse, M., Beckers, J., et al. (2021). C9orf72-derived arginine-containing dipeptide repeats associate 
with axonal transport machinery and impede microtubule-based motility. Sci. Adv. 7, eabg3013. 
31.  Gupta, R., Lan, M., Mojsilovic-Petrovic, J., Choi, W.H., Safren, N., Barmada, S., Lee, M.J., and Kalb, R. 
(2017). The proline/arginine dipeptide from hexanucleotide repeat expanded C9ORF72 inhibits the 
proteasome. eNeuro 4, ENEURO.0249-16.2017. 
32.  Loveland, A.B., Svidritskiy, E., Susorov, D., Lee, S., Park, A., Zvornicanin, S., Demo, G., Gao, F.-B., and 
Korostelev, A.A. (2022). Ribosome inhibition by C9ORF72-ALS/FTD-associated poly-PR and poly-GR 
proteins revealed by cryo-EM. Nat. Commun. 13, 2776. 
33.  Lin, Y., Mori, E., Kato, M., Xiang, S., Wu, L., Kwon, I., and McKnight, S.L. (2016). Toxic PR poly-
dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeat expansion target LC domain polymers. Cell 167, 789-
802.e12. 
34.  Todd, T.W., McEachin, Z.T., Chew, J., Burch, A.R., Jansen-West, K., Tong, J., Yue, M., Song, Y., 
Castanedes-Casey, M., Kurti, A., et al. (2020). Hexanucleotide repeat expansions in c9FTD/ALS and 
SCA36 confer selective patterns of neurodegeneration in vivo. Cell Rep. 31, 107616. 
49 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
35.  Reyes, C.J., Asano, K., Todd, P.K., Klein, C., and Rakovic, A. (2022). Repeat-associated non-AUG 
translation  of  AGAGGG  repeats  that  cause  X-linked  dystonia-parkinsonism.  Mov.  Disord. 
10.1002/mds.29183. 
36.  Zu, T., Cleary, J.D., Liu, Y., Bañez-Coronel, M., Bubenik, J.L., Ayhan, F., Ashizawa, T., Xia, G., Clark, H.B., 
Yachnis, A.T., et al. (2017). RAN translation regulated by muscleblind proteins in myotonic dystrophy 
type 2. Neuron 95, 1292-1305.e5. 
37.  Boeynaems, S., Holehouse, A.S., Weinhardt, V., Kovacs, D., Van Lindt, J., Larabell, C., Van Den Bosch, 
L., Das, R., Tompa, P.S., Pappu, R.V., et al. (2019). Spontaneous driving forces give rise to protein-RNA 
condensates with coexisting phases and complex material properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
116, 7889–7898. 
38.  Banerjee, P.R., Milin, A.N., Moosa, M.M., Onuchic, P.L., and Deniz, A.A. (2017). Reentrant Phase 
Transition Drives Dynamic Substructure Formation in Ribonucleoprotein Droplets. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed Engl. 56, 11354–11359. 
39.  Alshareedah, I., Moosa, M.M., and Raju, M. (2020). Phase transition of RNA− protein complexes into 
ordered hollow condensates. Proceedings of the. 
40.  Fisher, R.S., and Elbaum-Garfinkle, S. (2020). Tunable multiphase dynamics of arginine and lysine 
liquid condensates. Nat. Commun. 11, 4628. 
41.  Lu, S., Hu, J., Arogundade, O.A., Goginashvili, A., Vazquez-Sanchez, S., Diedrich, J.K., Gu, J., Blum, J., 
Oung, S., Ye, Q., et al. (2022). Heat-shock chaperone HSPB1 regulates cytoplasmic TDP-43 phase 
separation and liquid-to-gel transition. Nat. Cell Biol. 24, 1378–1393. 
42.  Mann, J.R., Gleixner, A.M., Mauna, J.C., Gomes, E., DeChellis-Marks, M.R., Needham, P.G., Copley, 
K.E., Hurtle, B., Portz, B., Pyles, N.J., et al. (2019). RNA binding antagonizes neurotoxic phase 
transitions of TDP-43. Neuron 102, 321-338.e8. 
43.  Brangwynne, C.P., Mitchison, T.J., and Hyman, A.A. (2011). Active liquid-like behavior of nucleoli 
determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 4334–
4339. 
44.  Maharana, S., Wang, J., Papadopoulos, D.K., Richter, D., Pozniakovsky, A., Poser, I., Bickle, M., Rizk, 
S., Guillén-Boixet, J., Franzmann, T.M., et al. (2018). RNA buffers the phase separation behavior of 
prion-like RNA binding proteins. Science 360, 918–921. 
45.  Henninger, J.E., Oksuz, O., Shrinivas, K., Sagi, I., LeRoy, G., Zheng, M.M., Andrews, J.O., Zamudio, A.V., 
Lazaris,  C.,  Hannett,  N.M.,  et  al.  (2021).  RNA-mediated  feedback  control  of  transcriptional 
condensates. Cell 184, 207-225.e24. 
46.  Strom, A.R., Emelyanov, A.V., Mir, M., Fyodorov, D.V., Darzacq, X., and Karpen, G.H. (2017). Phase 
separation drives heterochromatin domain formation. Nature 547, 241–245. 
47.  Gibson, B.A., Doolittle, L.K., Schneider, M.W.G., Jensen, L.E., Gamarra, N., Henry, L., Gerlich, D.W., 
Redding, S., and Rosen, M.K. (2019). Organization of chromatin by intrinsic and regulated phase 
separation. Cell 179, 470-484.e21. 
48.  Hayes, L.R., Duan, L., Bowen, K., Kalab, P., and Rothstein, J.D. (2020). C9orf72 arginine-rich dipeptide 
repeat proteins disrupt karyopherin-mediated nuclear import. Elife 9. 10.7554/eLife.51685. 
49.  Gittings, L.M., Boeynaems, S., Lightwood, D., Clargo, A., Topia, S., Nakayama, L., Troakes, C., Mann, 
D.M.A., Gitler, A.D., Lashley, T., et al. (2020). Symmetric dimethylation of poly-GR correlates with 
disease duration in C9orf72 FTLD and ALS and reduces poly-GR phase separation and toxicity. Acta 
Neuropathol. 139, 407–410. 
50.  Radwan, M., Ang, C.-S., Ormsby, A.R., Cox, D., Daly, J.C., Reid, G.E., and Hatters, D.M. (2020). Arginine 
in C9ORF72 dipolypeptides mediates promiscuous proteome binding and multiple modes of toxicity. 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 19, 640–654. 
51.  Moens, T.G., Niccoli, T., Wilson, K.M., Atilano, M.L., Birsa, N., Gittings, L.M., Holbling, B.V., Dyson, 
M.C., Thoeng, A., Neeves, J., et al. (2019). C9orf72 arginine-rich dipeptide proteins interact with 
50 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
ribosomal proteins in vivo to induce a toxic translational arrest that is rescued by eIF1A. Acta 
Neuropathol. 137, 487–500. 
52.  Zhang, Y.-J., Gendron, T.F., Ebbert, M.T.W., O’Raw, A.D., Yue, M., Jansen-West, K., Zhang, X., 
Prudencio, M., Chew, J., Cook, C.N., et al. (2018). Poly(GR) impairs protein translation and stress 
granule dynamics in C9orf72-associated frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Nat. Med. 24, 1136–1142. 
53.  Hartmann, H., Hornburg, D., Czuppa, M., Bader, J., Michaelsen, M., Farny, D., Arzberger, T., Mann, 
M., Meissner, F., and Edbauer, D. (2018). Proteomics and C9orf72 neuropathology identify ribosomes 
as poly-GR/PR interactors driving toxicity. Life Sci. Alliance 1, e201800070. 
54.  Yin, S., Lopez-Gonzalez, R., Kunz, R.C., Gangopadhyay, J., Borufka, C., Gygi, S.P., Gao, F.-B., and Reed, 
R. (2017). Evidence that C9ORF72 Dipeptide Repeat Proteins Associate with U2 snRNP to Cause Mis-
splicing in ALS/FTD Patients. Cell Rep. 19, 2244–2256. 
55.  Kwon, I., Xiang, S., Kato, M., Wu, L., Theodoropoulos, P., Wang, T., Kim, J., Yun, J., Xie, Y., and 
McKnight, S.L. (2014). Poly-dipeptides encoded by the C9orf72 repeats bind nucleoli, impede RNA 
biogenesis, and kill cells. Science 345, 1139–1145. 
56.  White, M.R., Mitrea, D.M., Zhang, P., Stanley, C.B., Cassidy, D.E., Nourse, A., Phillips, A.H., Tolbert, 
M., Taylor, J.P., and Kriwacki, R.W. (2019). C9orf72 poly(PR) dipeptide repeats disturb biomolecular 
phase separation and disrupt nucleolar function. Mol. Cell 74, 713-728.e6. 
57.  Zhang, Y.-J., Guo, L., Gonzales, P.K., Gendron, T.F., Wu, Y., Jansen-West, K., O’Raw, A.D., Pickles, S.R., 
Prudencio, M., Carlomagno, Y., et al. (2019). Heterochromatin anomalies and double-stranded RNA 
accumulation underlie C9orf72 poly(PR) toxicity. Science 363, eaav2606. 
58.  Castello,  A.,  Fischer,  B.,  Eichelbaum,  K.,  Horos,  R.,  Beckmann,  B.M.,  Strein,  C.,  Davey,  N.E., 
Humphreys, D.T., Preiss, T., Steinmetz, L.M., et al. (2012). Insights into RNA biology from an atlas of 
mammalian mRNA-binding proteins. Cell 149, 1393–1406. 
59.  Das, R.K., and Pappu, R.V. (2013). Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influenced 
by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 
13392–13397. 
60.  Greig, J.A., Nguyen, T.A., Lee, M., Holehouse, A.S., Posey, A.E., Pappu, R.V., and Jedd, G. (2020). 
Arginine-enriched mixed-charge domains provide cohesion for nuclear speckle condensation. Mol. 
Cell 77, 1237-1250.e4. 
61.  Lyons, H., Veettil, R.T., Pradhan, P., Fornero, C., De La Cruz, N., Ito, K., Eppert, M., Roeder, R.G., and 
Sabari, B.R. (2023). Functional partitioning of transcriptional regulators by patterned charge blocks. 
Cell 186, 327-345.e28. 
62.  Lasker, K., Boeynaems, S., Lam, V., Scholl, D., Stainton, E., Briner, A., Jacquemyn, M., Daelemans, D., 
Deniz,  A.,  Villa,  E.,  et  al.  (2022).  The  material  properties  of  a  bacterial-derived  biomolecular 
condensate tune biological function in natural and synthetic systems. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–15. 
63.  Holehouse, A.S., Ginell, G.M., Griffith, D., and Böke, E. (2021). Clustering of aromatic residues in 
prion-like domains can tune the formation, state, and organization of biomolecular condensates. 
Biochemistry 60, 3566–3581. 
64.  Alley, E.C., Khimulya, G., Biswas, S., AlQuraishi, M., and Church, G.M. (2019). Unified rational protein 
engineering with sequence-based deep representation learning. Nat. Methods 16, 1315–1322. 
65.  Inhibiting eukaryotic transcription. Which compound to choose? How to evaluate its activity? 
66.  Yung, B.Y., Bor, A.M., and Chan, P.K. (1990). Short exposure to actinomycin D induces “reversible” 
translocation of protein B23 as well as “reversible” inhibition of cell growth and RNA synthesis in 
HeLa cells. Cancer Res. 50, 5987–5991. 
67.  Schmidt, H.B., Jaafar, Z.A., Wulff, B.E., Rodencal, J.J., Hong, K., Aziz-Zanjani, M.O., Jackson, P.K., 
Leonetti, M.D., Dixon, S.J., Rohatgi, R., et al. (2022). Oxaliplatin disrupts nucleolar function through 
biophysical disintegration. Cell Rep. 41, 111629. 
51 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
68.  Lafita-Navarro, M.C., and Conacci-Sorrell, M. (2023). Nucleolar stress: From development to cancer. 
Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 136, 64–74. 
69.  Bernstam, L., and Nriagu, J. (2000). Molecular aspects of arsenic stress. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health B 
Crit. Rev. 3, 293–322. 
70.  Mookherjee, N., Anderson, M.A., Haagsman, H.P., and Davidson, D.J. (2020). Antimicrobial host 
defence peptides: functions and clinical potential. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 311–332. 
71.  Chongsiriwatana, N.P., Lin, J.S., Kapoor, R., Wetzler, M., Rea, J.A.C., Didwania, M.K., Contag, C.H., and 
Barron, A.E. (2017). Intracellular biomass flocculation as a key mechanism of rapid bacterial killing by 
cationic, amphipathic antimicrobial peptides and peptoids. Sci. Rep. 7. 10.1038/s41598-017-16180-
0. 
72.  Copolovici, D.M., Langel, K., Eriste, E., and Langel, Ü. (2014). Cell-penetrating peptides: design, 
synthesis, and applications. ACS Nano 8, 1972–1994. 
73.  Dürr, U.H.N., Sudheendra, U.S., and Ramamoorthy, A. (2006). LL-37, the only human member of the 
cathelicidin family of antimicrobial peptides. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1758, 1408–1425. 
74.  Sing, C.E., and Perry, S.L. (2020). Recent progress in the science of complex coacervation. Soft Matter 
16, 2885–2914. 
75.  Rumyantsev, A.M., Jackson, N.E., and de Pablo, J.J. (2021). Polyelectrolyte complex coacervates: 
Recent developments and new frontiers. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 12, 155–176. 
76.  Pirtskhalava, M., Amstrong, A.A., Grigolava, M., Chubinidze, M., Alimbarashvili, E., Vishnepolsky, B., 
Gabrielian, A., Rosenthal, A., Hurt, D.E., and Tartakovsky, M. (2021). DBAASP v3: database of 
antimicrobial/cytotoxic activity and structure of peptides as a resource for development of new 
therapeutics. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D288–D297. 
77.  Bhutia, S.K., and Maiti, T.K. (2008). Targeting tumors with peptides from natural sources. Trends 
Biotechnol. 26, 210–217. 
78.  Rádis-Baptista, G., and Kerkis, I. (2011). Crotamine, a small basic polypeptide myotoxin from 
rattlesnake venom with cell-penetrating properties. Curr. Pharm. Des. 17, 4351–4361. 
79.  Kramer, N.J., Haney, M.S., Morgens, D.W., Jovičić, A., Couthouis, J., Li, A., Ousey, J., Ma, R., Bieri, G., 
Tsui, C.K., et al. (2018). CRISPR-Cas9 screens in human cells and primary neurons identify modifiers 
of C9ORF72 dipeptide-repeat-protein toxicity. Nat. Genet. 50, 603–612. 
80.  Xu, T., Levitz, S.M., Diamond, R.D., and Oppenheim, F.G. (1991). Anticandidal activity of major human 
salivary histatins. Infect. Immun. 59, 2549–2554. 
81.  Lawrence, M.S., Phillips, K.J., and Liu, D.R. (2007). Supercharging proteins can impart unusual 
resilience. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 10110–10112. 
82.  Yeong, V., Werth, E.G., Brown, L.M., and Obermeyer, A.C. (2020). Formation of biomolecular 
condensates in bacteria by tuning protein electrostatics. ACS Cent. Sci. 6, 2301–2310. 
83.  Snoussi, M., Talledo, J.P., Del Rosario, N.-A., Mohammadi, S., Ha, B.-Y., Košmrlj, A., and Taheri-Araghi, 
S. (2018). Heterogeneous absorption of antimicrobial peptide LL37 in Escherichia coli cells enhances 
population survivability. Elife 7. 10.7554/eLife.38174. 
84.  Safa, N., Vaithiyanathan, M., Sombolestani, S., Charles, S., and Melvin, A.T. (2019). Population-based 
analysis of cell-penetrating peptide uptake using a microfluidic droplet trapping array. Anal. Bioanal. 
Chem. 411, 2729–2741. 
85.  Duchardt, F., Fotin-Mleczek, M., Schwarz, H., Fischer, R., and Brock, R. (2007). A comprehensive 
model for the cellular uptake of cationic cell-penetrating peptides. Traffic 8, 848–866. 
86.  Meyers,  R.M.,  Bryan,  J.G.,  McFarland,  J.M.,  Weir,  B.A.,  Sizemore,  A.E.,  Xu,  H.,  Dharia,  N.V., 
Montgomery, P.G., Cowley, G.S., Pantel, S., et al. (2017). Computational correction of copy number 
effect improves specificity of CRISPR-Cas9 essentiality screens in cancer cells. Nat. Genet. 49, 1779–
1784. 
52 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
87.  Boeynaems, S., Alberti, S., Fawzi, N.L., Mittag, T., Polymenidou, M., Rousseau, F., Schymkowitz, J., 
Shorter, J., Wolozin, B., Van Den Bosch, L., et al. (2018). Protein Phase Separation: A New Phase in 
Cell Biology. Trends Cell Biol. 28, 420–435. 
88.  Shin, Y., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2017). Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease. 
Science 357, eaaf4382. 
89.  Schavemaker, P.E., Śmigiel, W.M., and Poolman, B. (2017). Ribosome surface properties may impose 
limits on the nature of the cytoplasmic proteome. Elife 6. 10.7554/elife.30084. 
90.  Requião, R.D., Fernandes, L., de Souza, H.J.A., Rossetto, S., Domitrovic, T., and Palhano, F.L. (2017). 
Protein charge distribution in proteomes and its impact on translation. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, 
e1005549. 
91.  Lewenza, S. (2013). Extracellular DNA-induced antimicrobial peptide resistance mechanisms in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Front. Microbiol. 4, 21. 
92.  Johnson, L., Horsman, S.R., Charron-Mazenod, L., Turnbull, A.L., Mulcahy, H., Surette, M.G., and 
Lewenza,  S.  (2013).  Extracellular  DNA-induced  antimicrobial  peptide  resistance  in  Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium. BMC Microbiol. 13, 115. 
93.  Rao, N.N., Gómez-García, M.R., and Kornberg, A. (2009). Inorganic polyphosphate: essential for 
growth and survival. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 78, 605–647. 
94.  Thandapani, P., O’Connor, T.R., Bailey, T.L., and Richard, S. (2013). Defining the RGG/RG motif. Mol. 
Cell 50, 613–623. 
95.  Castello, A., Fischer, B., Frese, C.K., Horos, R., Alleaume, A.-M., Foehr, S., Curk, T., Krijgsveld, J., and 
Hentze, M.W. (2016). Comprehensive identification of RNA-binding domains in human cells. Mol. Cell 
63, 696–710. 
96.  Cubuk, J., Alston, J.J., Incicco, J.J., Holehouse, A.S., Hall, K.B., Stuchell-Brereton, M.D., and Soranno, 
A. (2023). The disordered N-terminal tail of SARS CoV-2 Nucleocapsid protein forms a dynamic 
complex with RNA. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2023.02.10.527914. 
97.  Fung,  H.Y.J.,  McKibben,  K.M.,  Ramirez,  J.,  Gupta,  K.,  and  Rhoades,  E.  (2020).  Structural 
characterization of tau in fuzzy tau:Tubulin complexes. Structure 28, 378-384.e4. 
98.  Davidson, W.S., Jonas, A., Clayton, D.F., and George, J.M. (1998). Stabilization of alpha-synuclein 
secondary structure upon binding to synthetic membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9443–9449. 
99.  Boeynaems, S., Dorone, Y., Marian, A., Shabardina, V., Huang, G., Kim, G., Sanyal, A., Şen, N.-E., 
Docampo, R., Ruiz-Trillo, I., et al. (2021). Poly(A)-binding protein is an ataxin-2 chaperone that 
emulsifies biomolecular condensates. bioRxiv, 2021.08.23.457426. 10.1101/2021.08.23.457426. 
100. Wang, J., Choi, J.-M., Holehouse, A.S., Lee, H.O., Zhang, X., Jahnel, M., Maharana, S., Lemaitre, R., 
Pozniakovsky, A., Drechsel, D., et al. (2018). A molecular grammar governing the driving forces for 
phase separation of prion-like RNA binding proteins. Cell 174, 688-699.e16. 
101. Yang, P., Mathieu, C., Kolaitis, R.-M., Zhang, P., Messing, J., Yurtsever, U., Yang, Z., Wu, J., Li, Y., Pan, 
Q., et al. (2020). G3BP1 is a tunable switch that triggers phase separation to assemble stress granules. 
Cell 181, 325-345.e28. 
102. Guillén-Boixet, J., Kopach, A., Holehouse, A.S., Wittmann, S., Jahnel, M., Schlüßler, R., Kim, K., 
Trussina, I.R.E.A., Wang, J., Mateju, D., et al. (2020). RNA-induced conformational switching and 
clustering of G3BP drive stress granule assembly by condensation. Cell 181, 346-361.e17. 
103. Bogaert, E., Boeynaems, S., Kato, M., Guo, L., Caulfield, T.R., Steyaert, J., Scheveneels, W., Wilmans, 
N., Haeck, W., Hersmus, N., et al. (2018). Molecular dissection of FUS points at synergistic effect of 
low-complexity domains in toxicity. Cell Rep. 24, 529-537.e4. 
104. Yoshizawa, T., Ali, R., Jiou, J., Fung, H.Y.J., Burke, K.A., Kim, S.J., Lin, Y., Peeples, W.B., Saltzberg, D., 
Soniat, M., et al. (2018). Nuclear import receptor inhibits phase separation of FUS through binding 
to multiple sites. Cell 173, 693-705.e22. 
53 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
105. Guo, L., Kim, H.J., Wang, H., Monaghan, J., Freyermuth, F., Sung, J.C., O’Donovan, K., Fare, C.M., Diaz, 
Z., Singh, N., et al. (2018). Nuclear-import receptors reverse aberrant phase transitions of RNA-
binding proteins with prion-like domains. Cell 173, 677-692.e20. 
106. Hofweber, M., Hutten, S., Bourgeois, B., Spreitzer, E., Niedner-Boblenz, A., Schifferer, M., Ruepp, M.-
D., Simons, M., Niessing, D., Madl, T., et al. (2018). Phase separation of FUS is suppressed by its 
nuclear import receptor and arginine methylation. Cell 173, 706-719.e13. 
107. Qamar, S., Wang, G., Randle, S.J., Ruggeri, F.S., Varela, J.A., Lin, J.Q., Phillips, E.C., Miyashita, A., 
Williams, D., Ströhl, F., et al. (2018). FUS phase separation is modulated by a molecular chaperone 
and methylation of arginine cation-π interactions. Cell 173, 720-734.e15. 
108. Chai, J., Du, C., Wu, J.W., Kyin, S., Wang, X., and Shi, Y. (2000). Structural and biochemical basis of 
apoptotic activation by Smac/DIABLO. Nature 406, 855–862. 
109. Kambach, C., Walke, S., Young, R., Avis, J.M., de la Fortelle, E., Raker, V.A., Lührmann, R., Li, J., and 
Nagai, K. (1999). Crystal structures of two Sm protein complexes and their implications for the 
assembly of the spliceosomal snRNPs. Cell 96, 375–387. 
110. Cummings, C.S., and Obermeyer, A.C. (2018). Phase separation behavior of supercharged proteins 
and polyelectrolytes. Biochemistry 57, 314–323. 
111. Boeynaems, S., De Decker, M., Tompa, P., and Van Den Bosch, L. (2017). Arginine-rich peptides can 
actively mediate liquid-liquid phase separation. Bio Protoc. 7, e2525. 
112. Guse, A., Fuller, C.J., and Straight, A.F. (2012). A cell-free system for functional centromere and 
kinetochore assembly. Nat. Protoc. 7, 1847–1869. 
113. Westhorpe, F.G., Fuller, C.J., and Straight, A.F. (2015). A cell-free CENP-A assembly system defines 
the chromatin requirements for centromere maintenance. J. Cell Biol. 209, 789–801. 
114. French, B.T., Westhorpe, F.G., Limouse, C., and Straight, A.F. (2017). Xenopus laevis M18BP1 Directly 
Binds Existing CENP-A Nucleosomes to Promote Centromeric Chromatin Assembly. Dev. Cell 42, 190-
199.e10. 
115. Lowary, P.T., and Widom, J. (1998). New DNA sequence rules for high affinity binding to histone 
octamer and sequence-directed nucleosome positioning. J. Mol. Biol. 276, 19–42. 
116. Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, 
C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. 
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682. 
117. Chai, Q., Singh, B., Peisker, K., Metzendorf, N., Ge, X., Dasgupta, S., and Sanyal, S. (2014). Organization 
of ribosomes and nucleoids in Escherichia coli cells during growth and in quiescence. J. Biol. Chem. 
289, 11342–11352. 
118. Kuhlman,  T.E.,  and  Cox,  E.C.  (2010).  Site-specific  chromosomal  integration  of  large  synthetic 
constructs. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, e92. 
119. Chiva, C., Olivella, R., Borràs, E., Espadas, G., Pastor, O., Solé, A., and Sabidó, E. (2018). QCloud: A 
cloud-based quality control system for mass spectrometry-based proteomics laboratories. PLoS One 
13, e0189209. 
120. Weinhardt, V., Chen, J.-H., Ekman, A.A., Guo, J., Remesh, S.G., Hammel, M., McDermott, G., Chao, 
W., Oh, S., Le Gros, M.A., et al. (2020). Switchable resolution in soft x-ray tomography of single cells. 
PLoS One 15, e0227601. 
121. Chen, J.-H., Vanslembrouck, B., Loconte, V., Ekman, A., Cortese, M., Bartenschlager, R., McDermott, 
G., Larabell, C.A., Le Gros, M.A., and Weinhardt, V. (2022). A protocol for full-rotation soft X-ray 
tomography of single cells. STAR Protoc. 3, 101176. 
122. Parkinson, D.Y., Knoechel, C., Yang, C., Larabell, C.A., and Le Gros, M.A. (2012). Automatic alignment 
and reconstruction of images for soft X-ray tomography. J. Struct. Biol. 177, 259–266. 
54 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531820; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
123. Yang, Z., Deng, X., Liu, Y., Gong, W., and Li, C. (2020). Analyses on clustering of the conserved residues 
at protein-RNA interfaces and its application in binding site identification. BMC Bioinformatics 21, 
57. 
124. Ginell, G.M., Flynn, A.J., and Holehouse, A.S. (2022). SHEPHARD: a modular and extensible software 
architecture  for  analyzing  and  annotating  large  protein  datasets.  bioRxiv. 
10.1101/2022.09.18.508433. 
125. Emenecker, R.J., Griffith, D., and Holehouse, A.S. (2021). Metapredict: a fast, accurate, and easy-to-
use predictor of consensus disorder and structure. Biophys. J. 120, 4312–4319. 
126. Tunyasuvunakool, K., Adler, J., Wu, Z., Green, T., Zielinski, M., Žídek, A., Bridgland, A., Cowie, A., 
Meyer, C., Laydon, A., et al. (2021). Highly accurate protein structure prediction for the human 
proteome. Nature 596, 590–596. 
127. Lalmansingh, J.M., Keeley, A.T., Ruff, K.M., Pappu, R.V., and Holehouse, A.S. (2023). SOURSOP: A 
Python package for the analysis of simulations of intrinsically disordered proteins. bioRxivorg. 
10.1101/2023.02.16.528879. 
128. Hein, M.Y., Hubner, N.C., Poser, I., Cox, J., Nagaraj, N., Toyoda, Y., Gak, I.A., Weisswange, I., Mansfeld, 
J., Buchholz, F., et al. (2015). A human interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by 
stoichiometries and abundances. Cell 163, 712–723. 
129. Smits, A.H., Lindeboom, R.G.H., Perino, M., van Heeringen, S.J., Veenstra, G.J.C., and Vermeulen, M. 
(2014). Global absolute quantification reveals tight regulation of protein expression in single Xenopus 
eggs. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 9880–9891. 
130. Bassal, M., Abukhalaf, M., Majovsky, P., Thieme, D., Herr, T., Ayash, M., Tabassum, N., Al Shweiki, 
M.R., Proksch, C., Hmedat, A., et al. (2020). Reshaping of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome 
landscape and co-regulation of proteins in development and immunity. Mol. Plant 13, 1709–1732. 
131. Wiśniewski, J.R., and Rakus, D. (2014). Quantitative analysis of the Escherichia coli proteome. Data 
Brief 1, 7–11. 
132. Carpy, A., Krug, K., Graf, S., Koch, A., Popic, S., Hauf, S., and Macek, B. (2014). Absolute proteome and 
phosphoproteome dynamics during the cell cycle of Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Fission Yeast). 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 1925–1936. 
133. Ghaemmaghami, S., Huh, W.-K., Bower, K., Howson, R.W., Belle, A., Dephoure, N., O’Shea, E.K., and 
Weissman, J.S. (2003). Global analysis of protein expression in yeast. Nature 425, 737–741. 
134. Matlock, M.K., Holehouse, A.S., and Naegle, K.M. (2015). ProteomeScout: a repository and analysis 
resource for post-translational modifications and proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D521-30. 
135. Sherman, B.T., Hao, M., Qiu, J., Jiao, X., Baseler, M.W., Lane, H.C., Imamichi, T., and Chang, W. (2022). 
DAVID: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and functional annotation of gene lists (2021 
update). Nucleic Acids Res. 50, W216–W221. 
136. Holehouse, A.S., Das, R.K., Ahad, J.N., Richardson, M.O.G., and Pappu, R.V. (2017). CIDER: Resources 
to analyze sequence-ensemble relationships of intrinsically disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 112, 16–
21. 
137. Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B.L., Gillette, M.A., Paulovich, A., 
Pomeroy, S.L., Golub, T.R., Lander, E.S., et al. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-
based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 
15545–15550. 
138. Mitrea, D.M., Cika, J.A., Guy, C.S., Ban, D., Banerjee, P.R., Stanley, C.B., Nourse, A., Deniz, A.A., and 
Kriwacki, R.W. (2016). Nucleophosmin integrates within the nucleolus via multi-modal interactions 
with proteins displaying R-rich linear motifs and rRNA. Elife 5. 10.7554/eLife.13571. 
55 
 

NEW PAGE