bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
 
An innate granuloma eradicates an environmental 
pathogen using Gsdmd and Nos2 
 
 
 
Carissa K. Harvest1,2,3, Taylor J. Abele1,2, Chen Yu4, Cole J. Beatty1,4, Megan E. Amason1,2,3, 
Zachary P. Billman1,2,3, Morgan A. DePrizio1,2, Carolyn A. Lacey1,2, Vivien I. Maltez3, Heather N. 
Larson1,2,3, Benjamin D. McGlaughon3, Daniel R. Saban1,4, Stephanie A. Montgomery5, and 
Edward A. Miao1,2,6 
 
 
 
 
 
1   Department of Integrative Immunobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, 
NC, USA 
2   Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of Medicine, 
Durham, NC, USA 
3   Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA 
4   Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA 
5   Department of Pathology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA 
6   Department of Cell Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA 
 
 
Correspondence to:  
Edward A. Miao 
edward.miao@duke.edu 
919-668-7555 
   

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
SUMMARY 
Granulomas often form around pathogens that cause chronic infections. Here, we 
discover a novel granuloma model in mice. Chromobacterium violaceum is an environmental 
bacterium that stimulates granuloma formation that not only successfully walls off but also 
clears the infection. The infected lesion can arise from a single bacterium that replicates in the 
presence of a neutrophil swarm. Bacterial replication ceases when macrophages organize 
around the infection and form a granuloma. This granuloma response is accomplished 
independently of adaptive immunity that is typically required to organize granulomas. The C. 
violaceum-induced granuloma requires at least two separate defense pathways, gasdermin D 
and iNOS, to maintain the integrity of the granuloma architecture. These innate granulomas 
successfully eradicate C. violaceum infection. Therefore, this new C. violaceum-induced 
granuloma model demonstrates that innate immune cells successfully organize a granuloma 
and thereby eradicate infection by an environmental pathogen. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Chromobacterium violaceum is a Gram-negative bacterium found in freshwater sediment 
and soils. This colorful bacterium, which produces a violet pigment, encodes a type III secretion 
system (T3SS) that is similar to the invasion-associated T3SS found in Salmonella species1. C. 
violaceum uses this T3SS to invade and replicate in nonphagocytic cells2,3. Immunocompetent 
people are likely often exposed to C. violaceum, but almost never develop symptomatic 
infection. Conversely, immunocompromised patients can be highly susceptible to C. violaceum 
infection. For example, patients with chronic granulomatous disease, who have defects in the 
phagocyte NADPH oxidase, are highly susceptible to disseminated C. violaceum infection with a 
mortality rate of around 55%1,4. Concomitantly, mice lacking the NADPH oxidase succumb to 
low dose C. violaceum infection within one day3. In addition, we previously discovered that 
resistance to C. violaceum requires the T3SS-sensing NLRC4 inflammasome, caspase-1, and 
gasdermin D3,5. Mice deficient in these pyroptosis-inducing genes succumb to very low dose 
infection3. Therefore, C. violaceum has potent virulence potential conferred by its T3SS that is 
fully counteracted by a functional innate immune system.  
This defense requires NADPH oxidase and inflammasomes, however, herein we 
demonstrate a much more complex innate immune defense must be orchestrated in order to 
eradicate C. violaceum. Large distinct lesions form in the liver of wild type C57BL/6 mice during 
C. violaceum infection5,6. Nevertheless, these wild type mice never display visible clinical signs 
and survive the infection. In this manuscript, we discover that these liver lesions are actually 
organized granulomas that form in order to eradicate this environmental bacterial pathogen. 
Granulomas are an organized aggregation of immune cells that surround a persistent 
stimulus, the origin of which can be either infectious or noninfectious. Granuloma responses are 
initiated during infection by pathogens across diverse classes of microorganisms, including 
bacteria, parasites, fungi, and viruses7-17. A defining characteristic of a granuloma is the 
recruitment and organization of inflammatory macrophages into a layer that surrounds the 
infection7-11,14,15,18. Numerous other immune cell types can be present, most prominently T cells 
that activate macrophages and are normally essential to organize the granuloma 
architecture7,8,10,14,18-22. Granulomas associated with different infections can have diverse 
histologic architecture7-17. For example, some granulomas contain necrotic cores at their 
centers, whereas others are composed of intact immune cells8. Regardless of the specific 
histologic architecture of the granuloma, all contain a defining organized ring of macrophages.  
Granulomas often form around persistent infectious agents, and granulomas often fail to 
clear such infections7,10,19,22,23. These pathogens often survive within the granuloma, leading 
many to conclude that the granuloma response is a last resort used against an infection that 
cannot be cleared. Thus, granulomas are often considered as a way to restrain an infectious 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
agent and prevent its dissemination, albeit while simultaneously being unable to eradicate the 
infectious agent. Actually, individual granulomas can be heterogeneous – some granulomas 
clear the infection whereas other granulomas have progressive infection containing viable 
organisms even within the same animal24. Given the diverse clinical outcomes and the lack of 
understanding as to what drives the formation of various granulomatous responses, novel 
models are needed to study the range of the granuloma responses, particularly mouse models 
that leverage advanced immunological technologies25,26.  
Other granuloma-inducing pathogens, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis, do not 
clearly demonstrate a critical role for the pyroptotic pathway proteins (inflammasomes, caspase-
1, and gasdermin D). Some studies show that murine M. tuberculosis infection is exacerbated in 
the absence pyroptotic pathway mutants27, whereas others show no role28,29. These contrast 
with the macaque M. tuberculosis infection model, where caspase-1 played a minimal role 
unless macaques were treated with anti-PD1, when caspase-1 activation was correlated with 
higher M. tuberculosis burdens30. This detrimental role was recapitulated in knockout mice when 
PD-1 knockouts were crossed with Casp1–/–Casp11–/– double knockouts30. M. tuberculosis might 
be detected by inflammasomes, but also has strategies to evade detection31-40. Varying 
penetrance of evasion in different models or strains could explain these disparate results41. 
Thus, whether pyroptotic proteins are useful in the granuloma response remains unclear. 
Herein, we examine the granuloma response to C. violaceum from the initiating events 
through to clearance of the bacterium and provide definitive evidence for a beneficial role of 
pyroptotic proteins during the granuloma response.  
 
 
RESULTS 
 
C. violaceum triggers formation of a necrotic granuloma  
Intraperitoneal C. violaceum infection of wild type C57BL/6J mice caused macroscopic 
white-to-cream-colored lesions specifically in the liver (Figure 1A)5,6. Lesions were evenly 
distributed and typically 1-2 mm in diameter at 5 days post infection (dpi) (Figure 1B). We 
investigated the histologic morphology by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and 
consistently observed three distinct layers in every lesion (Figure 1C; green box and 1D). First 
the center was characterized by dark hematoxylin (purple) staining of amorphous material 
locking defined cell borders and features, consistent with necrotic debris (Figure 1C). 
Surrounding this necrotic core was the second layer, composed of degenerative cells that 
retained cell borders but lost morphologic subcellular detail, identified as hepatocytes based on 
their location, size, and nuclear morphology. (Figure 1C and 1E). The nuclei retained their size 
and shape but displayed faded hematoxylin chromatin staining, and with some having an absent 
nucleus (degeneration). The cytoplasm stained brightly eosinophilic (pink), hepatocyte boarders 
remained apparent, and the cells sporadically merged with the necrotic core (Figure 1D and 
1E), indicative of coagulative necrosis42.  
The third layer, exterior to the layer of coagulative necrosis, was predominantly 
composed of cells with abundant cytoplasm and a large, oval nucleus with open chromatin 
which is consistent with activated macrophages (Figure 1F). We refer to this layer as the 
“macrophage zone”. Within this macrophage zone, scattered fibroblasts were present, identified 
by their fusiform shape, faint eosinophilic cytoplasmic staining, and a distinct, dark elongated 
nucleus (Figure 1F; carrot). Immediately exterior to the macrophage zone are viable 
hepatocytes at 5 dpi (Figure 1F; asterisk). The distinct, organized zone of macrophages 
surrounding each lesion is a defining feature of a granuloma, with the presence of a necrotic 
core subcategorizing them as a necrotic granuloma.  
 
A granuloma forms in response to one bacterium 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
To determine whether each granuloma was initiated by a single bacterium, we infected 
mice with a 1:1 ratio of WT (violacein positive) and ∆vioA mutant (violacein negative) C. 
violaceum strains and determined the number and color of colony forming units (CFUs) from 
dissected single granulomas (Figure 1G and S1A). The vast majority of single granulomas 
contained only one C. violaceum strain (Figure 1G and S1A). The mixed color granulomas may 
arise from errors in dissection where two granulomas where harvested instead of one. This 
result suggests that these granulomas are seeded by a single bacterium. In addition, WT and 
∆vioA seeded equivalent numbers of granulomas with similar burdens per granuloma (Figure 
1G), indicating that violacein pigment is dispensable for liver infection43. This suggests that a 
single bacterium replicates to a median 5.4x106 CFUs in each granuloma by 3 dpi. Clearly, the 
innate immune response fails to halt C. violaceum replication within the first 3 dpi. 
 
Neutrophil swarming fails to eradicate C. violaceum  
We next investigated the early hours of infection to understand the granuloma 
development. C. violaceum infects hepatocytes using its T3SS2, a cell type in which we were 
unable to detect caspase-1 protein3, suggesting that this niche is not defended by caspase-1. 
We visualized C. violaceum by immunohistochemical staining 12 hours post infection (hpi) and 
observed bacteria within hepatocytes (Figure 1H). Other bacteria were also observed in immune 
cells (Figure S1B). We observed multiple bacteria within each hepatocyte, suggesting that the 
bacteria were replicating by 12 hpi. At 24 hpi, larger, distinct lesions appear, comprised of a 
swarm of neutrophils identified morphologically by their multilobulated nucleus, and confirmed 
by Ly6G staining (Figure 1I). Macrophages were absent from these lesions by morphological 
identification and verified by CD68 staining (Figure 1I and S1C). C. violaceum staining showed 
bacteria only within the neutrophil swarm and absent from surrounding hepatocytes (Figure 1I). 
Bacteria were tightly clustered within individual neutrophils (Figure 1I). Bacterial burdens in the 
liver increased by ~100-fold between 6 hpi and 24 hpi (Figure 1J). In contrast, the spleen had 
low burdens at 6 hpi, and burdens were cleared by 18 hpi (Figure 1J) and remain sterile at 3 
dpi3. Thus, despite the presence of a neutrophilic response within the first 24 hpi, C. violaceum 
continues to replicate exponentially within the liver. 
Although the histologically apparent neutrophils failed to clear the bacteria, reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) are required to slow bacterial replication over the first 24 hpi. Myeloid 
cells generate ROS in the phagosome using the phagocyte NADPH oxidase, which includes 
p47phox encoded by Ncf1. Ncf1–/– mice succumb to even 100 CFUs of C. violaceum within 24 
hpi3. Ncf1–/– mice showed increased numbers of C. violaceum-positive liver lesions at 12 hpi 
(Figure 1K). These ranged from a few neutrophils to sizable neutrophil swarms, albeit smaller 
than those seen in WT mice (Figure 1L). Again, C. violaceum staining clustered tightly within the 
neutrophil swarm in Ncf1–/– mice (Figure 1L). Thus, although the NADPH oxidase limits seeding 
of lesions by C. violaceum, neutrophils nevertheless fail to eradicate C. violaceum which 
continues to grow within the neutrophil swarm of WT mice.  
 
A granuloma forms around the infected neutrophil swarm 
Because neutrophils fail to eradicate C. violaceum, a more effective immune response is 
needed. By 3 dpi, the lesions have enlarged (Figure 2A). The neutrophils observed at 1 dpi now 
form the bulk of the necrotic core at 3 dpi, identified by Ly6G staining (Figure 2B and 2C). We 
observed a zone of coagulative necrotic hepatocytes surrounding the necrotic core (Figure 2B). 
C. violaceum staining was observed in the necrotic core, but not inside the sparse coagulative 
necrotic hepatocytes in the core (Figure 2D; carrots). At 3 dpi we observed a thin macrophage 
zone identified by morphology and confirmed with CD68 staining (Figure 2B and 2C). Bacterial 
staining was essentially absent in the macrophage zone, except rare areas where neutrophils 
were infiltrating the periphery of the granuloma (Figure 2B and 2C). Further, no C. violaceum 
staining was observed in the healthy hepatocytes outside the granuloma (Figure 2B and 2C). 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
This architecture indicates the formation of an early granuloma which can be subcategorized 
into a necrotic suppurative granuloma (pyogranuloma)8. 
  At 5 dpi, the macrophage zone became thicker, with pronounced CD68 staining (Figure 
2B and 2C), while neutrophil staining at the periphery became sparser (Figure 2B and 2C). 
Concomitantly, we identified fibroblasts by morphology and colocalized collagen deposition, 
both within the macrophage zone (Figure 2B and 2C). C. violaceum staining was still 
predominantly within the necrotic core (overlapping with Ly6G); notably, all the bacterial staining 
was contained within the granuloma (Figure 2B and 2C). At 7 dpi the macrophage zone had 
become even thicker while the necrotic core appears smaller than at 3 and 5 dpi (Figure 2A, 2B, 
and 2C). At this timepoint the coagulative necrosis zone persists, and collagen staining is also 
more prominent (Figure 2B). Epithelioid macrophages are present in the granulomas of other 
animal models and express E-cadherin to form tight junctions, functioning to help wall off the 
pathogen 44. However, we did not observe E-cadherin staining in the C. violaceum-induced 
granuloma (Figure S1D). This C. violaceum-induced granuloma model demonstrates the ability 
of macrophages to organize a granuloma that successfully prevents bacterial dissemination. 
   At 14 dpi most granulomas were visibly smaller, although rare granulomas remain large 
in occasional mice (Figure 3A). In a typical 14 dpi granuloma the macrophage zone remained 
prominent, while the necrotic core became even smaller; in some granulomas the necrotic core 
was completely absent (Figure 3B and S1E; arrows). The coagulative necrotic zone remained 
prominent, although the cellular borders of the coagulative necrotic hepatocytes were no longer 
distinct. The macrophage zone remained prominent and began to infiltrate the coagulative 
necrotic zone (Figure 3B). At earlier timepoints, C. violaceum staining and CD68 staining do not 
overlap (Figure 2B and 2C), however, surprisingly at 14 dpi these stains now overlap in the 
macrophage zone (Figure 3B and S1F). This staining pattern suggests that dead bacterial 
antigens have been phagocytosed by macrophages in the process of removing the necrotic 
core. In resolved livers, which were common at 21 dpi, we observed small clusters of various 
immune cells and small, flat areas of collagen (Figure 3C and 3D). Such areas are consistent 
with a granuloma that has contracted and has almost completely resolved.  
 
Individual granulomas resolve at different rates  
Maximal bacterial burdens peak at 3 dpi and decrease over time thereafter (Figure 3E 
and S2A). This correlates with the appearance of the macrophage zone, suggesting that the 
switch of neutrophils to macrophages halts bacterial replication. Starting at 7 dpi, some mice 
cleared the infection, and the proportion of mice that cleared steadily increased over time, 
although the kinetics of clearance vary slightly between experiments (Figure 3E, 3F, S2A and 
S2B). The majority of mice clear the infection between 14 and 35 dpi (Figure 3F and S2A). 
Infrequently at later time points, sporadic mice still had bacterial burdens. We 
hypothesize these burdens arise from single granulomas that have not yet resolved (Figure 3A). 
In such remaining granulomas, C. violaceum staining is still located in the necrotic core (Figure 
S2C), more similar to a typical granuloma at 5 dpi. The amount of total liver inflammation 
decreases over time with visual disappearance of the necrotic core (Figure 3G and S2E). This 
suggests that individual granulomas eliminate bacteria independently of each other within the 
same mouse. Indeed, when we dissected single granulomas at 7 dpi some granulomas were 
sterile while others contained burdens within the same mouse, and a greater proportion became 
sterile at 10 dpi (Figure S2E). These observations suggest that the granuloma response 
successfully clears C. violaceum infection. 
 
Adaptive immunity is not required  
  Most granuloma responses involve the adaptive immune system in which T cells are 
maintain or support the organization of the macrophage zone7,8,14,21,22. However, in the C. 
violaceum-induced granuloma T cells within the macrophage zone were sporadic and 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
unorganized (Figure 3D and S2F). Stochastic clearance of burdens began at 10 dpi in both WT 
and Rag1–/– mice (Figure 3E, 3F, 3G, and 3H). The proportion of mice that cleared the infection 
increased through 37 dpi when both WT and Rag1–/– had the same percentage of mice 
sterilizing the infection (Figure 3I and 3J). The trend of clearance between WT and Rag1–/– mice 
is similar, which is consistent with previous results using a lower dose infection3. Furthermore, 
both groups survived the infection equally (Figure 3K). The abundance and the architecture of 
granulomas per liver section between WT and Rag1–/– was similar at 3 dpi (Figure 3L) and of 3 
Rag1–/– mice analyzed by H&E staining at 26 dpi, two had no granulomas and one had a single 
small resolving granuloma (Figure S2G). Although adaptive immunity is not required for this 
granuloma response, this does not preclude adaptive responses from being critical in future 
infections. Indeed, WT mice that were rechallenged with C. violaceum did not develop visible 
granulomas or bacterial burdens at 3 days post-secondary infection (not shown). Taken 
together, C. violaceum induces the formation of innate granulomas that organize, eradicate the 
bacteria, and resolve without the need for adaptive immunity.  
 
Ischemia and coagulation outside the granuloma 
We observed other pathology outside the granuloma structure. Ischemia was observed 
in WT mice at 3 and 5 dpi (Figure 2A, arrowhead, and S3A) often directly adjacent to a 
granuloma (Figure S3B and S3C), suggesting that the granuloma occluded or affected the blood 
supply. Ischemia observed in isolation could be adjacent to a granuloma outside the histologic 
plane. Ischemic areas were of various sizes and did not stain for C. violaceum antigens (Figure 
S3D). We did not observe ischemia past 7 dpi suggesting rapid regeneration, consistent with 
the robust regenerative power of hepatocytes. We frequently observed thrombosis in the liver 
vasculature, some of which occluded hepatic vessels and caused ischemia in the downstream 
tissue (Figure S3C and S3E).  
 
Perforin and caspase-7 are not required for the granuloma response 
  Natural killer (NK) cell attack reduces C. violaceum burdens in the liver3 requiring 
perforin and caspase-75. We have shown cleaved caspase-7 staining in what we now know are 
granulomas of WT mice5, however, NK cells were scarce and unorganized within the 
macrophage zone (Figure S3F). Prf1–/– mice survive and clear C. violaceum infection by 19 dpi 
(Figure S3G and S3H), and both Prf1–/– and Casp7–/– mice have similar granuloma architecture 
compared to WT mice (Figure S3I). Thus, although some NK cells are present, neither perforin 
nor caspase-7 are required for the overall granuloma-mediated clearance of C. violaceum. 
 
Gasdermin D is essential during the granuloma response 
C. violaceum uses a T3SS to reprogram host cells. However, the activity of this T3SS 
can be detected by the NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasome, activating caspase-1, which cleaves pro-
IL-1β, pro-IL-18, and gasdermin D to their active forms. Once cleaved, gasdermin D 
oligomerizes and forms a pore that inserts into the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, 
resulting in the influx of fluids causing the cell to swell and undergo pyroptotic lysis. Pyroptosis 
is an inflammatory form of regulated cell death that can combat intracellular infection45. 
Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice infected with C. violaceum succumb to infection 3-9 dpi 
and had increased burdens in both the liver and spleen (Figure 4A, 4B, and 4C)3,5. We observed 
obvious abnormalities within the granuloma architecture of both knockouts at 3 dpi (Figure 4D 
and 4E), with complete loss of the distinct layers seen in WT mice (Figure 4F). Most lesions in 
these knock out mice have increased abundance of necrosis containing Ly6G and C. violaceum 
staining (Figure 4F and 4G). These lesions have a ‘budding’ morphology with strong Ly6G 
staining but little CD68 staining (Figure 4F and 4G; H&E, brackets). Within each budding area 
and throughout each lesion in Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice we observed C. violaceum 
staining that extended to the outer edge of the lesion (Figure 4F and 4G), and outside the 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
defective granulomas (Figure S3J and S3K). This loss of bacterial containment could arise by 
escape from the defective granuloma or seeding via portal circulation from the infected spleen. 
These data clearly demonstrate that caspase-1/11 and gasdermin D are required for the 
granuloma to form and contain C. violaceum infection. 
 
Spatial mapping of the granuloma transcriptome 
To investigate gene expression within different zones of the granuloma, we used spatial 
transcriptomics (10x Genomics Visium) to capture mRNA from granulomas in WT mice during 
C. violaceum infection (Figure S4A). Liver sections at 12 hpi, 1, 3, 5, 10, 14 and 21 dpi 
contained granulomas that appear representative of each timepoint. Although the 7 dpi liver 
section unfortunately contained a non-representative granuloma that was smaller than normal 
(Figure S4A), this timepoint was nevertheless included within the analysis. We identified sixteen 
distinct expression clusters within the granuloma and the surrounding liver (Figure S4A). 
Clusters had distinct distribution profiles within the layers of the granuloma architecture (Figure 
5A and S4B). To assign cell types within each capture area we used published single cell 
sequencing data from the Mouse Cell Atlas (Figure 5A, 5B, S4A, and S4B).  
Immune cell-enriched Ptprc (CD45)-positive areas were located on the left half of the 
UMAP plot, while non-immune clusters were on the right and generally expressed the 
hepatocyte marker Alb (Figure S4C and S4D). We annotated clusters by both sequencing- and 
histological-based parameters: necrotic core (NC) – identified based on their basophilic 
properties and low RNA abundance; coagulative necrotic zone (CN) – identified based on 
spatial overlap with regions of diffuse tissue damage surrounding the necrotic core; CN-
macrophage zone (CN-M) – identified based on their presence at the nexus between the CN 
and M zones; macrophage zone (M) – identified based on the mildly basophilic nature of the 
underlying tissue and presence outside the CN zone (Figure 5C and S4E). Sub-zonal 
annotation was used to denote unique clusters found in the same zone. We created gene 
expression modules using markers from published single cell RNA sequencing datasets from 
mouse liver46,47 cross referenced in ImmGen for cell-type-specific expression, and selected 
marker genes expressed in our spatial transcriptomics dataset. We created modules for 
neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, T cells, fibroblasts, hepatocytes, and endothelial cells 
(Figure S4G). The neutrophil module was peaking at 3 dpi, after which their expression 
diminishes but remains present over time (Figure 5D). Monocytes prevalence peaked at 3 dpi 
and declined thereafter (Figure 5D), suggesting that the monocytes differentiated into 
macrophages, which became maximal at 3 dpi and stayed steady throughout the granuloma 
response (Figure 5D). Consistent with their lack of involvement in the granuloma response, T 
cell gene expression was minimal (Figure 5D). Fibroblast gene expression peaks at 5 dpi and 
remains steady until later timepoints (Figure 5D).  
By assigning modules to zones we observed that neutrophil gene expression was 
present primarily within the necrotic core and the coagluative necrotic layers (Figure 5E), which 
histologically are composed of necrotic debris, indicating that mRNAs from dead neutrophils 
persists. Macrophage and monocyte gene expressions were present primarily throughout the 
coagulative necrotic zone, macrophage zone, and just outside the macrophage zone (Figure 
5E) but were minimal in the necrotic core. Fibroblast gene expression was seen throughout the 
macrophage zone spreading into the coagulative necrotic zone (Figure 5E), consistent with 
Sirius red staining (Figure 2B). Hepatocyte and endothelial cell gene expression was diminished 
within the granuloma and was predominant in the outer surrounding tissue (Figure 5E). Using 
key genes from each cell module, we confirmed their location within the granuloma by spatial 
expression in each capture area (Figure 5F). Collectively, this spatial transcriptomics data 
confirms the histologically visualized distribution of cell types and the specific staining for cell 
types with marker-specific antibodies.   
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Nitric oxide is required to clear C. violaceum in the granuloma 
Nos2 and Acod1 both have been previously implicated in other granuloma models48-52 
and we saw expression of both in our spatial transcriptomics data.  Nos2 encodes inducible 
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), an enzyme that produces nitric oxide (NO) that can kill bacteria. 
Acod1 encodes IRG1, an enzyme that produces itaconate, which can also kill bacteria and 
immunometabolic activities53,54. Indeed, we observed that NO can kill C. violaceum in vitro, and 
although itaconate alone was not toxic, it enhanced NO toxicity (Figure S5A). This suggested 
that iNOS and IRG1 might cooperate to sterilize the granuloma. However, Acod1–/– mice 
survived C. violaceum infection with normal bacterial burdens (Figure S5B and S5C). Therefore, 
IRG1 is expressed in the granuloma, but is not essential for clearance of C. violaceum.  
In contrast, all Nos2–/– mice succumbed to C. violaceum infection (Figure 6A), confirmed 
with littermate controls (Figure S5D). The importance of iNOS was not yet manifested at 3 dpi, 
when C. violaceum continued to replicate normally in the liver and continued to be cleared from 
the spleen of Nos2–/– mice (Figure 6B), suggesting that iNOS did not act during the neutrophil 
swarm phase of the infection. Bacterial burdens increased in the liver of Nos2–/– mice at 5 dpi 
and continued to increase at 7 dpi compared to WT mice, and Nos2–/– mice succumbed shortly 
thereafter (Figure 6A, 6C, and 6D). The spleen also showed high C. violaceum burdens for the 
majority of the Nos2–/– mice at these later time points (Figure 6C and 6D), which may reflect 
dissemination from the liver rather than an open niche in the spleen. 
 Nos2–/– mice had greater areas of the liver affected, and their granulomas were 
markedly abnormal (Figure 6E). Granulomas in Nos2–/– mice did have a necrotic core 
surrounded by a coagulative necrotic zone. However, in contrast to WT mice, beyond the 
coagulative necrotic hepatocytes we observed multiple zones of Ly6G-positive necrosis with 
interspersed additional fragmented coagulative necrotic zones. C. violaceum staining appears 
lighter compared to WT granulomas, however, closer examination revealed that the bacteria 
were more dispersed throughout the granuloma and present in more discrete clusters akin to a 
1 dpi lesion in WT mice (Figure 6E and 1I). This suggested that C. violaceum breached the 
granuloma and initiated new neutrophil swarms. Indeed, we observed C. violaceum staining 
throughout the zones in Nos2–/– mice even reaching the edge of the granuloma.  
The macrophage zone abnormalities in Nos2–/– mice varied between granulomas. Some 
Nos2–/– granulomas had single breaches in the macrophage zone (shown below in Figure 7), 
whereas other infected granulomas lost the macrophage zone altogether (Figure 6E). This loss 
of architecture could be due to the large influx of neutrophils that have overrun the granuloma 
response, potentially disrupting nascent macrophage zones. Neutrophil and macrophage 
numbers in the liver were equal by flow cytometry at 3 dpi in WT and Nos2–/– mice, but at 7 dpi 
we observed significantly more neutrophils and fewer macrophages in Nos2–/– mice (Figure 6F). 
This is consistent with histological staining for neutrophil and macrophage markers (Figure 6E).  
We used spatial transcriptomics to visualize the general location of Nos2 expression in 
the granuloma architecture of WT mice over time (Figure 6G). As early as 12 hpi we observed 
modest Nos2 expression, which became strongest at 3 dpi and continued throughout the 
infection (Figure 6G). This expression pattern correlated with elevated bacterial burdens in 
Nos2–/– mice but was offset by 2 days (Figure 6B), at 3 dpi macrophages are maximizing Nos2 
mRNA, but bacterial burdens in Nos2–/– mice are not elevated until 5 dpi (Figure 6C). To 
reconcile this discrepancy, we stained for iNOS protein. Despite spatial transcriptomics 
detection of Nos2 mRNA as early as 12 and 24 hpi, iNOS staining was not detectable at 1 dpi, 
and staining at 3 dpi was quite faint (Figure S5E). iNOS staining became prominent only at 5 dpi 
(Figure S5F). Thus, Nos2 mRNA expression precedes detectable iNOS protein content as well 
as bacterial clearance. Altogether, this data demonstrates that granuloma macrophages 
express iNOS, that NO can kill C. violaceum, and in the absece of iNOS the granuloma cannot 
maintain its organized architecture. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Gasdermin D and iNOS are independently required to maintain the granuloma 
architecture. 
Both Gsdmd–/– and Nos2–/– mice have disrupted granuloma architecture and fail to clear 
C. violaceum. We examined whether iNOS is downstream of gasdermin D in this granuloma 
response. This was not the case, since Nos2 expression and NO production in Gsdmd–/– mice 
were elevated compared to WT mice (Figure 7A and 7B). Furthermore, burdens per granuloma 
were elevated in Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice at 3 dpi, but not in Nos2–/– mice (Figure 7C). 
Whereas Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice support splenic C. violaceum replication at 3 dpi, 
Nos2–/– have little to no spleen burdens at this timepoint (Figure 4B, 4C, and 6B). To quantitate 
the defect in the overall granuloma response, we measured the area of total active inflammation 
in the liver section as a percentage of the total tissue area. Both Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice 
had increased inflammation at 3 dpi (Figure S5G and S5H), which correlates with increased 
bacterial burdens (Figure 4B, 4C). At this same timepoint, Nos2–/– mice did not have increased 
inflammation or burdens (Figure S5G, S5H, and 6B). It was not until 5 dpi when both Gsdmd–/– 
and Nos2–/– mice had increased inflammation (Figure 7D).  
Defective granulomas are heterogeneous. To quantitate the severity of failed granuloma 
architecture, a board-certified pathologist blindly scored each granuloma for the presence of 
granuloma zones, containment of Ly6G-positive cells, and the integrity of the macrophage zone 
(Figure 7E). A score of zero indicates fully intact granuloma architecture (as in Figure 1C). An 
intermediate score includes granulomas with discreet breaches in the macrophage zone. Such 
breaches are typically connected to a budding morphology that consists of a neutrophil swarm 
with C. violaceum staining that appears similar to a 1 dpi lesion (Figure 7F compared to Figure 
1I). A score of four represents a complete loss of architecture (e.g. Gsdmd–/– in Figure 4G and 
Nos2–/– in Figure 6E). Both Gsdmd–/– and Nos2–/– mice had a markedly increased number of 
failed granulomas compared to WT mice (Figure 7E). These data indicate gasdermin D and 
iNOS are both independently required to maintenance of granuloma architecture.  
We further examined Nos2 expression in the granuloma. Nos2 expression was 
associated with spatial transcriptomic clusters that contain CD45-expressing immune cells 
(Figure S5I and 5C); the highest level of Nos2 expression were in clusters 6, 8, 9, and 11 
(Figure S5I). These clusters with high Nos2 expression were located at the periphery of the 
necrotic core and within the coagulative necrotic zone, and surprisingly less associated with the 
macrophage zone (Figure 5E). We had previously only noted a single macrophage zone at the 
periphery of the granuloma. However, instructed by these Nos2 spatial expression patterns, we 
reevaluated the C. violaceum granuloma histology focusing on the border between the necrotic 
core and the coagulative necrotic hepatocytes. Indeed, in addition to the “peripheral 
macrophage zone” we observed a second, albeit thinner, “inner macrophage zone” between the 
coagulative necrotic hepatocytes and the necrotic core (Figure 7G and 2C). Therefore, in 
addition to validating gene candidates, spatial genomics highlighted new granuloma zones that 
were less apparent by H&E staining.  
We next stained for iNOS protein to determine the relative expression in these two 
macrophage zones. Consistent with the spatial transcriptomics data, iNOS overlapped with 
CD68 staining in the inner macrophage zone (Figure 7G and S5F). Gsdmd–/– mice have lost 
their granuloma architecture but retain CD68 staining, albeit discontinuously, at the periphery of 
the granuloma. Concomitantly, iNOS staining was maintained at the periphery of the granuloma, 
and was also weakly visible within hepatocytes based on nuclei staining and lack of CD68 and 
Ly6G staining (Figure 7G and S5F). Hepatocytes are known to produce NO via iNOS under 
stressful conditions55,56, which could occur due to the failed granuloma response Gsdmd–/– mice. 
However, the NO produced by hepatocytes is not enough to rescue the failed granuloma 
response in these knock out mice.  We again observed that Gsdmd–/– and Nos2–/– mice had C. 
violaceum staining throughout the entire granuloma, not limited to the core (Figure S5J). 
Therefore, both gasdermin D and iNOS are required to keep C. violaceum contained in the 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
granuloma core. The C. violaceum-induced granuloma requires at least two separate defense 
pathways, gasdermin D and iNOS, to maintain the integrity of the granuloma architecture, which 
is essential to eradicate C. violaceum infection. 
 
Discussion 
C. violaceum first infects hepatocytes and rapidly leads to a neutrophil swarm within 1 
day. Remarkably, C. violaceum continues to replicate through day 3 despite the copious 
numbers of neutrophils. This is a catastrophic failure of the innate immune response. We 
speculate that this failure of neutrophils to kill the bacteria is the primary problem that triggers 
the granuloma response. C. violaceum has numerous virulence traits, including T3SS effectors, 
most of whose functions remain unknown2, which could cause this neutrophil failure. In other 
infectious models, such as Yersinia species, the same neutrophil failure could arise from 
virulence traits that mitigate neutrophil function57. Indeed, pyogranulomas form in response to 
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infection in the small intestine, which is driven by monocytes12,58-61. 
We speculate that during C. violaceum and Y. pseudotuberculosis infections it is the failure of 
neutrophils that triggers the granuloma response. Neutrophils have also been recently 
implicated in the granuloma response to M. tuberculosis, with recent studies showing that M. 
tuberculosis preferentially occupies and replicates in live or necrotic neutrophils62-64. However, 
this occurs once the granuloma is already formed, and other studies show neutrophils are not 
the first immune cell to be infected65,66. Thus, whether neutrophils play a key role in granuloma 
initiation remains unclear in the M. tuberculosis-induced granuloma. In contrast, by providing 
well-defined early events that precede granuloma formation, we propose the C. violaceum-
induced granuloma may be revealing a fundamental reason that would explain granuloma 
formation.  
In studies of M. tuberculosis infection in mice, pyroptosis-deficient mice sometimes have 
exacerbated infections and a failed granuloma response27, whereas others show no role28,29. 
This is in contrast to the clear and robust protective role of pyroptotic proteins in the C. 
violaceum-induced granuloma. Although C. violaceum can inhibit the apoptotic caspases6,67, it 
does not inhibit the pyroptotic caspases. We demonstrated that caspase-1/11 and gasdermin D-
mediated defenses are essential to maintain granuloma architecture. Without these pyroptotic 
proteins, mice still express Nos2 and generate NO, but this antibacterial mechanism fails clear 
the infection. During C. violaceum infection, WT mice have less total liver inflammation from the 
granuloma response compared to Casp1/11–/– and Gsdmd–/– mice, and these pyroptosis 
proteins prevent the spread of the bacteria to the edge of the granuloma. We speculate that 
pyroptosis prevents C. violaceum from establishing a replicative niche within the organized 
granuloma macrophage zones. Thus, we do not see a role for the pyroptotic proteins in driving a 
pathological exacerbation of the granuloma inflammatory response, and instead we 
demonstrate a clear beneficial role during the successful granuloma response. 
Many other granuloma models have had contrasting conclusions as to whether caspase-
1/11 and gasdermin D contributed to granuloma biology. During Schistosomiasis, where 
granuloma formation is pathological, multiple pyroptotic pathway knockout mice have smaller 
granulomas68-70, suggesting that pyroptotic proteins are detrimental. This conclusion is the 
opposite to our conclusion with C. violaceum, and may be due to the fact that schistosomes are 
large extracellular parasites, thus pyroptosis is not needed to prevent intracellular infection. 
Similarly, in a noninfectious granuloma response, mice treated with trehalose 6.6’-dimycolate, a 
mycobacterial glycolipid, Nlrp3–/– mice had fewer granulomas compared to WT mice71. Thus, in 
models where granulomas drive pathological tissue damage, inflammasomes can exacerbate 
this.  
We show that iNOS is absolutely essential for the granuloma response to C. violaceum. 
WT mice use iNOS to eradicate C. violaceum and thus they survive; in contrast, Nos2–/– mice 
succumb to the infection due to granuloma failure. Nos2–/– mice also have increased 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
susceptibility to M. tuberculosis infection62, however, unlike C. violaceum infection, iNOS fails to 
clear M. tuberculosis in mice and WT mice fail clear M. tuberculosis infection72,73. We speculate 
that M. tuberculosis has strong NO resistance mechanisms, thwarts the sterilizing effects of NO, 
and thereby is able to survive in granulomas long term72. During M. tuberculosis infection, NO 
also plays an immunomodulatory role by suppressing IL-1 production to limit pathology and 
prevent neutrophil recruitment49,50. If we are correct that M. tuberculosis is highly NO resistant, it 
may be that the primary role of NO during M. tuberculosis infection is to modulate the 
inflammatory response. We also observe increased neutrophil recruitment and a loss of 
granuloma architecture in Nos2–/– mice, however, if C. violaceum is sensitive to NO killing, this 
cannot be separated from immunomodulation. We speculate that during C. violaceum-induced 
granuloma response the primary role of NO is to kill bacteria, and impeding neutrophil influx is a 
secondary function that may or may not be essential. There is another key difference between 
iNOS function in these two granuloma-inducing pathogens – during M. tuberculosis infection, 
Nos2 expression is driven by the adaptive immune response49, whereas during C. violaceum 
infection the adaptive immune response is dispensable. Thus, the C. violaceum-induced 
granuloma demonstrates that innate immunity can use iNOS to sterilize a granuloma without 
adaptive T cell help. 
  The current understanding of granuloma biology remains perplexing, despite being 
studied for over a century in various granuloma models7,14. Granuloma biology is intriguing due 
to the sophisticated organization of immune cells unified into a multicellular collective to combat 
a pathogen that poses a dire threat to the host. Understanding how a granuloma operates 
requires animal model systems where the complexities of the immune response can be studied 
in its entirety, from the very first hours of infection to the final stages of resolution. C. violaceum 
provides such a model, where a granuloma rapidly forms and efficiently eradicates this 
environmental pathogen. That the granuloma successfully clears C. violaceum is remarkable 
because many pathogens survive within granulomas chronically. It may be that such host-
adapted pathogens have virulence factors that thwart the efficacy of the granuloma, whereas 
environmental pathogens such as C. violaceum lack this capacity. Therefore, the C. violaceum-
induced granuloma model could be a new way to understand the complexities of granuloma 
biology and clearly demonstrates that granulomas are potent immune defenses that can 
successfully eradicate infection.  
 
Acknowledgments: We thank R. Flavell and R. Vance for sharing mice directly, or through The 
Jackson Laboratory. This work was supported by the following NIH grants: AI133236, AI139304, 
AI136920 (E.A.M.) AI133236-04S1(C.K.H); NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program DGE 
2139754 (T.J.A.).. We thank the Histology Research Core Facility in the Department of Cell 
Biology and Physiology at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill NC for all paraffin-
embedded histological services. We thank the Molecular Genomics Core at Duke University for 
processing and analyzing the spatial transcriptomics (10X Genomics Visium). We thank F. 
Lakhani, M. Artunduaga, S. Pereles, A. Vaidyanathan, R. Eplett, M. Mann, S. Redecke, L. 
Scarpelli, A. Bryan, and F. Lin for mouse colony upkeep. 
 
 
Author contributions. C.K.H. performed most of the experiments with T.J.A., M.A.D., C.A.L., 
V.I.M., and Z.P.B. performing some experiments. E.A.M. supervised the overall project. S.A.M. 
supervised histology analysis. H.N.L. and B.D.M. managed the mouse colony. C.Y. and C.J.B 
performed the module-based analysis of spatial sequencing data; supervised by D.R.S. M.E.A 
performed flow cytometry and analysis. C.K.H. and E.A.M. wrote the paper. 
 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Competing interests C.A.L. is employed by AbbVie. This article is composed of the authors' 
work and ideas and does not reflect the ideas of AbbVie. 
 
FIGURES 
 
Figure 1. C. violaceum replicates despite a neutrophil swarm. 
(A-L) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum or indicated strains.  
(A-F) Gross pathology and H&E staining of WT livers 5 dpi. Representative of 10 experiments, 
each with 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. Arrow, coagulative necrotic 
hepatocyte; arrowhead, macrophage; carrot, fibroblast.  
(G) Inoculum was a 1:1 mixture of WT and ∆vioA C. violaceum. 83 individual granulomas were 
dissected 3 dpi, bacterial burdens determined, and scored for color. Data combined from two 
experiments. n.s., not significant by Kruskal-Wallis test. 
(H) Visualization of C. violaceum within a hepatocyte at 12 hpi by IHC. 
(I) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 1 dpi. Representative of 5 
experiments, each with 4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
(J) Bacterial burdens in the liver and spleen at indicated timepoints. Representative of 2 
experiments; each point is a single mouse.  
(K) Quantitation of C. violaceum-positive stained areas per section 12 hpi in WT and Ncf1–/– 
mice. Combined data from 2 experiments, each with 3 mice per genotype. **p<0.01, by 
unpaired two-tailed t test 
(L) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 12 dpi in WT and Ncf1–/– mice. 
Representative of 2 experiments each with 3-4 mice per genotype.  
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line, median.  
 
Figure 2. A granuloma forms around the infected neutrophil swarm. 
(A-D) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) H&E staining of WT livers 1, 3, 5, and 7 dpi. Representative of 10 experiments (3 and 5 dpi) 
and 5 experiments (1 and 7 dpi), each with 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(B) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 3, 5, and 7 dpi. Representative of 
10 experiments (3 and 5 dpi) and 5 experiments (7 dpi), each with 4 mice, each with multiple 
granulomas per section. 
(C) WT liver sections stained with indicated IF markers 3, 5, and 7 dpi. Representative of 2 
experiments; each with 4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
(D) Visualization of C. violaceum 3 dpi; carrot, coagulative necrotic hepatocytes. 
 
Figure 3. Adaptive immunity is not required to resolve the granuloma 
(A-L) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) H&E staining of WT livers 14 dpi. Representative of 3 experiments, each with 3-4 mice, each 
with multiple granulomas per section. 
(B) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 14 dpi. Representative of 3 
experiments, each 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(C) H&E staining of WT livers 21 dpi. Representative of 3 experiments, each with 3-4 mice, 
each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(D) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 21 dpi. Representative of 3 
experiments, each 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(E, H, and I) Bacterial burdens in the liver and spleen at indicated timepoints. Representative of 
2 experiments; each point is a single mouse. ns, not significant, by Two-way ANOVA (H) or 
Kruskal-Wallis test (I).  
(F) Bacterial burdens from (E) displayed as % bacterial clearance.  

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(G) Percent active inflammation quantified per whole liver section stained with H&E. Data 
combined from 2 experiments, each point is a single mouse. **p<0.01, by Kruskal-Wallis test. 
(J) Bacterial burdens from (I; liver) displayed as % bacterial clearance. 
(K) Survival analysis of WT and Rag1–/– mice. Representative of 2 experiments each with 8-12 
mice per genotype. ns, not significant, by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.  
(L) H&E staining of WT and Rag1–/– livers at 3 dpi. Representative of 2 experiments, each with 
3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line, median.  
 
Figure 4. Gasdermin D is essential during the granuloma response. 
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) Survival analysis of WT, Casp1–/–Casp11–/– (Casp1/11–/–), and Gsdmd–/– mice. 
Representative of 2 experiments, each with 6-8 mice per genotype. ****p<.0001, by Kaplan-
Meier survival analysis with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. 
(B and C) Bacterial burdens in the liver and spleen at 3 dpi. Data combined from 2 experiments, 
each point is a single mouse. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<.0001, by Mann-Whitney test. 
(D-G) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers 3 dpi. Representative of 2 
experiments, each 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line, median. 
 
Figure 5. Spatial mapping of the granuloma transcriptome. 
(A-F) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum and one liver was harvested per indicated 
timepoint for spatial transcriptomic analysis.  
(A) H&E and spatial transcriptomic orientation of indicated clusters from same granuloma at 5 
dpi.  
(B) UMAP plot for cluster expression orientation for all clusters from all timepoints of infection.  
(C) UMAP plot of cluster expression in designated locations within granuloma architecture.  
(D) Module scores of various immune cell and fibroblast expression markers from granulomas 
throughout infection time course.  
(E) Indicated cell type expression dot plot in each cluster location within the granuloma 
architecture of all combined time points of infection.  
(F) Spatial transcriptomic expression of indicated genes representing immune and non-immune 
cells within 5 dpi granuloma. S100a9 (neutrophils), Cd68 (macrophages), Ccr2 (monocytes), 
Trac (T cells), Col1a1 (fibroblasts), and Alb (hepatocytes and endothelial cells). 
 
Figure 6. Nitric oxide is required to clear C. violaceum in the granuloma. 
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) Survival analysis of WT and Nos2–/– mice. Representative of 2 experiments, each with 11 
mice per genotype. ****p<.0001, by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis.  
(B-D) Bacterial burdens in the liver and spleen at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. Data representative of 2 
experiments, each point is a single mouse. Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line data 
median. ns, not significant, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ****p<.0001, by Unpaired two tailed t test (liver B; 
spleen C; liver and spleen D) and Mann-Whitney test (spleen B; liver C).     
(E) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers of WT and Nos2–/– livers and 
granulomas 5 dpi. Representative of 2 experiments, each with 3-4 mice, each with multiple 
granulomas per section. 
(F) Flow cytometry of total neutrophil and macrophage numbers from WT livers 3 and 7 dpi. 
Data representative of two experiments, each with 4-6 mice per genotype. ns, not significant, 
*p<0.05, and ****p<.0001, by Two-way ANOVA. 
(G) Spatial transcription of Nos2 expression within WT granulomas at indicated timepoints.  
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 7. Gasdermin D and iNOS are independently required to maintain the granuloma 
architecture. 
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) qPCR of Nos2 gene expression in WT granulomas 4 dpi. Representative of 2 experiments, 
each point is 5-6 pooled granulomas harvested from single mouse. ****p<.0001, by Mann-
Whitney test. 
(B) Total nitrate and nitrite concentrations of serum from WT mice 4 dpi. Representative of 2 
independent experiments performed in triplicate. *p<0.05, by Kruskal-Wallis test. 
(C) Bacterial burdens of single granulomas at 3 dpi. Data combined from 2 experiments, each 
point is a single granuloma. Solid line, data median. ****p<.0001, by One-way ANOVA test. 
(D) Percent active inflammation quantified per whole liver section stained with H&E. 
Representative of 2 experiments, each point is a single mouse. *p<0.05, by Kruskal-Wallis test.  
(E) Granulomas scored for failure of granuloma architecture at 5 dpi. Data combined from 2 
experiments, each with 3-4 mice per genotype, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
****p<.0001, by Kruskal-Wallis test.  
(F) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers of a failed granuloma 7 dpi. 
Representative of 2 experiments, each 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(G) WT and Gsdmd–/– liver sections stained with indicated IF markers 5 dpi. Representative of 2 
experiments; each with 4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
 
 
METHODS 
Bacterial Strains and Culture Conditions  
Chromobacterium violaceum ATCC 12472 was used in all experiments except mixed 
inocula where its nalidixic acid spontaneous resistant mutant CVN was used as WT and was 
mixed with CVN ΔvioA strain 1:1 for infection. All strains were grown on a brain heart infusion 
(BHI)a agar plates overnight at 37°C. Bacteria were subcultured in 2 mL BHI broth with aeration 
at 37°C overnight and directly diluted to 1 x 104 CFU/ml PBS for infection inoculum.  
 
Mouse Infection and Survival 
For all experiments 8- to 12-week-old mice were infected via intraperitoneal route at 
indicated CFUs of bacteria in PBS. Mice were monitored for survival or whole livers, spleens, 
and individual granulomas were harvested at indicated time points and homogenized and plated 
on BHI and grown as described above. 
 
Mouse Strains 
All mouse strains were bred and housed at Duke University in a pathogen-specific free facility. 
For infection mice were transferred to a BSL2 infection facility within Duke University, and mice 
allowed to acclimate for at least two days before infection. Wild type C57BL/6 (Jackson 
Laboratory), Ncf1mt/mt (referred to as Ncf1–/–; Jackson #004742), Casp1–/–Casp11129mt/129mt 
(referred to as Casp1/11–/–)75, Gsdmd–/– 76, Rag1–/–(Jackson #0022216), Prf1–/– (Jackson 
#002407), Casp7–/– (Jackson #006237), Nos2–/– (Jackson #002609) and Acod1–/– (Jackson 
#029340) mice. Animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee (IACUC) at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill or by the IACUC at Duke 
University and met guidelines of the US National Institutes of Health for the humane care of 
animals. 
 
Histology 
For paraffin embedded tissues, whole livers were harvested from euthanized mice and 
placed in 10% buffered formalin (VWR Cat. No. 16004-128) in 50 mL conical tubes. Tubes were 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
inverted and swirled every other day for a minimum of 3 days to allow for full penetration of 
formalin into the tissue. Once fixed the liver were placed in tissue cassettes and transferred to 
the Histology Research Core at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill for embedding, 
cutting, slide mounting, and staining. The Histology Research Core performed all H&E and 
Sirius Red staining and serial sectioning of paraffin embedded tissues. For frozen fixed tissues, 
mice were whole body perfused through the heart with 2% paraformaldehyde (diluted down in 
PBS from 16%; VWR Cat. No. 15710-S), then livers were harvested and placed in 2% 
paraformaldehyde for 24 hours at 4°C then placed in 30% sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. 
S1888) in PBS for 48 hours at 4°C. After incubating in 30% sucrose livers were placed in OCT 
media (Sakura Cat. No. 4583) at room temperature for 4 hours then inserted into frozen tissue 
cassettes filled with OCT media and frozen at -80°C. Frozen tissues were sectioned in our lab 
using a cryostat (Cryostar NX70). Pathologic analysis was performed with oversight from a 
board-certified veterinary pathologist (S.A.M). 
 
Tissue Processing for Bacterial Plating 
Whole livers were harvested at indicated timepoints and placed into a 7 ml homogenizer 
tube (Omni International Cat. No. 19-651) containing 3 mL sterile PBS and one 5 mm stainless 
steel bead (QIAGEN Cat. No. 69989). Spleens and single granulomas were harvested at 
indicated timepoints and placed into a 1 ml homogenizer tube (Fisher Brand Cat. No. 14-666-
315) containing 1 mL sterile PBS and one 5 mm stainless steel bead. All were homogenized on 
a Fisher Brand Mead mill 24 homogenizer for livers and a Retsch MM400 homogenizer for 
spleens and single granulomas. After homogenization, tissue lysates were serially diluted 1:5 in 
sterile PBS and plated on BHI agar plates. Plates were incubated overnight at 37°C and colony 
forming units counted.  
 
Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescent Staining 
For immunohistochemistry of paraffin embedded tissue, slides with 5 µm thick tissue 
sections were washed in xylene (Epredia Cat. No. 9990501) for 15 minutes, then 100% ethanol 
(Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. E7023) 3 times for 3 minutes each, then 95% ethanol two times for 3 
minutes each, then 80% ethanol for 3 minutes, then washed in ddiH2O for 8 minutes to 
rehydrate the tissues. For antigen retrieval slides were incubated in sodium citrate buffer (2.94 g 
Tri-Sodium Citrate, dH20 1 L, mix to dissolve, pH to 6.0 with 1N HCl, add 0.05 mL Tween 20) 
and pressure cooked in a pressure cooker (Instant Pot Ultra) on the high pressure setting for 12 
minutes. Slides were cooled for a minimum of 20 minutes in a slide rack at room temperature 
and then washed in TBS-T 1x (100mL 10xTBS, 900mL ddiH20, 1mL Tween-20) for 1 minute. A 
pap pen was used to make a hydrophobic boarder around the tissues and then tissues were 
blocked with normal goat serum blocking solution, 2.5% (Vector Laboratories S-1012-50) at 
room temperature for 30 minutes. Tissues were washed with TBS-T 1X, then tissue was 
blocked with an Avidin/Biotin Blocking Kit (Vector Laboratories SP-2001) following manufactures 
protocol, then washed in TBS-T 1X again. Primary antibodies IHC: C. violaceum, 1:2000 (rabbit 
antisera custom generated by Cocalico Biologicals); Ly6G, 1:300 (Biolegend Cat. No. 127601); 
CD68, 1:200 (Abcam Cat. No. ab125212); CD3, 1:500 (Abcam Cat. No. ab5690); GFP, 1:200 
(Invitrogen Cat. No. A11122); were diluted in SignalStain antibody diluent (Cell Signaling 8112L) 
and incubated overnight at 4°C in a humidity chamber. Then slides were washed with TBS-T 1X 
for 1 minute three times, then blocked for 10 minutes with 3% hydrogen peroxide (Sigma Cat. 
No. H1009) to block endogenous peroxidase activity. Slides were washed 3 times for 1 minute 
then incubated with a secondary antibody polymer (Cell Signaling-Signal Stain boost, HRP anti-
rabbit, 8114; ImmPRESS® HRP Goat Anti-Rat IgG Polymer Detection Kit, Peroxidase, Cat. No. 
MP-7404-50). Slides were washed 3 times for 5 mintues, then stained with a DAB Substrate Kit, 
Peroxidase (HRP), (3,3'-diaminobenzidine; Vector Labs SK-4100) for 30-45 seconds. Then 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
counter stained with Harris Modified Hematoxylin (Epredia Cat. No. 72704) or Meyers Modified 
Hematoxylin (Abcam Cat. No. ab220365) for 10-30 seconds. Hematoxylin was blued using 
running tap water for 1 minute. Slides were dehydrated in 50% ethanol for 2 minutes, then 70% 
ethanol for 2 minutes, then two times in 100% ethanol for 2 minutes, then two times xylene for 5 
minutes. Slides were then covered with Permount mounting medium (Fisher Chemical SP15-
100) and covered with a coverslip.  
  For Immunofluorescence on frozen tissue (5 µm thick tissue sections), slides were 
brought to room temperature for 15-20 minutes and a pap pen was used to draw a hydrophobic 
barrier around the tissue. Tissues were blocked with 2% Fc block (BD Pharmingen Cat. No. 
553142) with 5% normal goat serum in 1X PBS at room temperature for one hour. Slides were 
washed for 1 minute in 1X PBS and then incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4°C in a 
humidity chamber. Primary antibodies IF: Ly6G Alexa Fluor 647, 1:100 (Biolegend Cat. No. 
127610), CD68 Alexa Fluor 488, 1:100 (Abcam Cat. No. ab201844), iNOS Alexa Fluor 568, 
1:100 (Abcam Cat. No. ab209595), e-cadherin, 1:200 (Abcam Cat. No. ab15148). Slides were 
then washed in 1X PBS three times for 5 minutes and incubated with a secondary antibody 
(Invitrogen Goat-anti-rabbit 594, 1:1000, Cat. No. A32740) at room temperature for an hour. 
Slides were washed in 1X PBS three times for 5 minutes and mounted using Fluoroshield™ 
with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich F6057) and covered with a coverslip.  
 
Histology Image Capture 
  All histology images were captured using a Keyence all-in-one Fluorescent Microscope 
BZ-X800/BZX810. For histology image stitching and IF analysis the BZ-X800 analyzer was 
used. 
 
10x Genomics Visium 
Infected mouse liver tissue was harvested at various time points and embedded in OCT 
(Sakura Cat. No. 4583) and frozen. Frozen livers were cut to optimal section thickness and 
placed on a Tissue Optimization Slide to determine permeabilization conditions. After, tissues 
were then placed within a 6.5mm2 field on an expression slide that contains 5,000 barcoded 
probes. The tissues were then fixed and stained with Hoechst and Eosin then permeabilized to 
release mRNA which binds to spatially barcoded capture probes, allowing for the capture of 
gene expression information. Captured mRNA from the slide surface was denatured, cleaved, 
and transferred into a PCR tube. From there, the cDNA was amplified and standard NGS 
libraries were prepared. Adapters were ligated to each fragment followed by a sample index 
PCR. The libraries were sequenced to an average of 50,000 reads/probe on a paired end, dual 
indexed flowcell in the format of 28x10x10x90. Data was then uploaded to analysis packages 
for visualization.  
Visium spatial data was analyzed using 10xGenomincs Space Ranger software and 
visualization through Loupe Browser77,78. Secondary statistical analysis will be performed using 
an R package in Seurat79. Linear dimensional reduction was preformed to calculate principal 
components using the most variably expressed genes in the spatial data. Spots were grouped 
into an optimal number of clusters for de novo cell type discovery using Seurat’s 
FindNeighbors() and FindClusters() functions, graph-based clustering approaches with 
visualization of spots is achieved through the use of  manifold learning technique UMAP 
(Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection)80. SpatialDimPlot() function in Seurat overlays 
the clustering results on the image to give combined plot of the expression data and the 
histology image. Additional downstream analyses include examining the distribution of a priori 
genes of interest, closer examination of genes associated with spot clusters, and the refined 
clustering of spots in order to identify further resolution of cell types, in addition to comparing 
differences between experiments of different states. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Module-Based Analysis of Spatial Sequencing Data 
To understand the cellular composition of each cluster, we leveraged two published 
single cell RNA-seq datasets46,47 from mouse liver and utilized the markers for immune cells and 
non-hematopoietic cells to calculate the module scores of different major cell types (Table S4E). 
The module score was generated as previously described81 using the AddModuleScore function 
from the Seurat R package version 482. Results were visualized using the ggplot2 R package 
and used to track the approximate relative abundance of unique cell types or specific genes at 
each infection time point. Abbrev. Key for our reference only: NC = Necrotic Core, CN = 
Coagulative Necrosis, M = Macrophage, EC = Endothelial Cell, OG = Outside Granuloma, Hep 
= Hepatocyte 
 
In vitro killing of C. violaceum with Itaconate and Nitric Oxide 
One WT C. violaceum colony was grown overnight in BHI broth then diluted to 1x106 
CFU/mL of PBS and mixed with various concentrations of DEA NONOate (Cayman Chemical 
Cat. No. 82100) with or without itaconic acid (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. No. I29204). Cultures were 
incubated at room temperature for 3 hours then diluted at 1:5 in sterile PBS and plated on BHI 
agar plates to assess bacterial viability. 
 
Flow Cytometry 
Whole livers were harvested at the indicated time points post infection. Briefly, mice 
were euthanized according to IACUC guidelines, followed by whole body perfusion with PBS 
(Gibco, Cat. No. 14190-144). Whole livers were harvested and minced on ice using scissors, 
followed by incubation in digestion buffer (100U/mL Collagenase Type IV (Gibco, Cat. No. 
17104019) prepared in DMEM (Gibco, Cat. No. 11885-084), supplemented with 1 mM CaCl  
2
and 1 mM MgCl ,) at 37°C for 40 minutes with intermittent vortexing. Digested tissues were 
2
mechanically homogenized through a Falcon® 40 µm cell strainer (Corning, Cat. No. 352340) to 
remove the majority of hepatocytes, and washed twice with RPMI (Gibco™, Cat. No. 11875-
093) supplemented with 1% FBS (CPS Serum, Cat. No. FBS-500-HI) and 1X 
penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco, Cat. No. 15140-122), followed by centrifugation in an Eppendorf® 
centrifuge (model 5810 R) at 1200 rpm (290g) for 8 minutes at room temperature. Leukocytes 
were further isolated using a Percoll® gradient: samples were resuspended in 45% Percoll® 
(GE Healthcare, Cat. No. 17-0891-01), prepared in DMEM + 1.5M NaCl), with an 80% Percoll® 
(prepared in PBS + 1.5 M NaCl) underlay, and spun for 20 minutes at 2000 rpm (805g), room 
temperature, with no brake. Following collection of the leukocyte layer at the gradient interface, 
samples were washed twice, as before, and red blood cells were lysed with 1X RBC Lysis 
Buffer (eBioscience, Cat. No. 00-4333-57, according to product manual). Cells were washed 
and counted using trypan blue. 1x106 cells from each liver were stained for various cell markers: 
Live-or-Dye™ fixable viability dye in APC-Cy™7 (Biotium, Cat. No. 32008, according to product 
manual), Mouse BD Fc Block™ (BD Biosciences, Cat. No. 553142, according to product 
manual) rat anti-mouse Ly-6G in BV421™ at 1:300 for 30 minutes (BD Horizon™, Cat. No. 
562737), and finally, rat anti-mouse CD68 in FITC at 1:300 for 30 minutes (BioLegend®, Cat. 
No. 137005) using Intracellular Fixation & Permeabilization Buffer (eBioscience, Cat. No. 88-
8824-00, according to product manual). Cells were acquired on a BD LSRFortessa X-20 Cell 
Analyzer (Duke Flow Cytometry Core Facility), and analyzed using FlowJo (for Windows, 
version 10.7.1).   
 
Quantification of relative Nos2 expression  
Granulomas were excised from infected livers and placed into 1 ml homogenizer tube 
(Fisher Brand Cat. No. 14-666-315) containing 1 mL sterile PBS and one 5 mm stainless steel 
bead (QIAGEN Cat. No. 69989). Nucleic acids were isolated from excised granulomas by 
homogenizing in TRIzol (Invitrogen, Cat. No. 15596026) for 10 minutes. After homogenization, 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
RNA was isolated by adding chloroform to a final ratio of 1:5 chloroform:TRIzol, centrifuging, 
then mixing the aqueous layer with 70% EtOH, then applying to Qiagen RNeasy columns to 
isolate RNAs longer than 200 bp. RNA purification by RNeasy column was performed according 
to the product manual. RNA quality was evaluated by 1% bleach gel83. cDNA was generated 
from 1 ug of RNA using Oligo dT(12-18) primers (Invitrogen, 18418012) and SuperScript II 
reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, 18064022). Resultant cDNA at 1:100 dilution was subject to 
qPCR performed using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad, Cat. No. 1708880) on a 
QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, A28567). Primers for Nos2 and 
B2m were designed using NCBI PrimerBlast84. Nos2 primers were designed to span exons 12 
and 13 of Nos2, where the calmodulin binding domain was replaced with a neomycin cassette 
to generate the Nos2 knockout mice85. Nos2 was amplified using primers NOS2_F and 
NOS2_R, and B2m was amplified using primers B2M_F and B2M_R. Nos2–/– mice did not 
amplify any product with primers NOS2_F and NOS2_R by agarose gel and melt curve 
analysis. Quantification of relative expression of NOS2 to B2M was determined using the ΔΔCt 
method86.999 At least 3 biological replicates were sampled for each treatment, and 3 technical 
replicates were run for each condition. 
Primers 
Name  Gene  Accession  Region  Sequence 
NOS2_F  NOS2  NM_010927.4  5`  TACCAGATCGAGCCCTGGAAGA 
NOS2_R  NOS2  NM_010927.4  3`  AGCAAAGAACACCACTTTCACCA 
B2M_F  B2M  NM_009735.3  5`  TGTATGCTATCCAGAAAACCCCT 
B2M_R  B2M  NM_009735.3  3`  AGCAAAGAACACCACTTTCACCA 
 
 
Total Nitrate and Nitrite Assay of C. violaceum granulomas 
Blood from indicated mouse strains was harvested via heart puncture and centrifuged at 
10,000 g for 6 minutes in serum separation tubes (BD Microtainer Blood Collection Tubes Cat. 
No. 365967). Serum was filtered through a Microcon-10kDa Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-
10 membrane (Millipore Cat. No. MRCPRT010) per company protocol. Filtered serum was 
diluted 1:8 in assay buffer and measured for total nitrate and nitrite using Nitrate/Nitrite 
Colorimetric Assay Kit (Cayman Chemical Cat. No. 780001). Absorbance was measured at 540 
nm using a BioTek Synergy H1 Microplate Reader, and total nitrate and nitrite calculated from 
absorbance using kit protocol.  
 
Total Percent Inflammation Measurements 
2X stitched images of whole liver were taken using a Keyence Microscope (BZ-X800). A control 
measurement was taken at this time using the internal Keyence measurement analysis tool to 
determine um^2 of control square. Images were then loaded into Microsoft Windows 10 Paint 
(version21H2) to trace both the whole liver and regions of inflammation. Traced images were 
loaded into Image J (win-64 version 1.53) and area measured using the tracing tool. Image J 
areas were converted into true um^2 area using the control measurement values. Percent 
inflammation determined by dividing the total area of inflammation measured by the total liver 
area measured.   
 
Statistical Analysis 
All statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 9. Discrete data was first assessed 
for normal distribution using a Shapiro-Wilk normality test. Data with normal distribution was 
analyzed with either unpaired two-tail t test (2 groups) or a one-way ANOVA (3 or more groups). 
Discrete data that did not have a normal distribution, or ordinal data for histological scoring, was 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
analyzed with a Mann-Whitney (2 groups) or Kruskal-Wallis (3 or more groups). Experiments 
with two factors were analyzed with a two-way ANOVA. Survival analyses were analyzed using 
a Kaplan-Meier survival curve with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons where 
appropriate.  
 
 
SUPPLEMENT FIGURES 
 
Supplement Figure 1. Characterization of the C. violaceum-induced granuloma. 
(A-F) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum or indicated strains. 
(A) Inoculum was a 1:1 mixture of WT and ∆vioA C. violaceum. Schematic for harvesting single 
granulomas using circular tipped tweezers. BHI agar plate representative of 5 dpi single 
granulomas’ plated CFUs. 
(A)  Visualization of C. violaceum within liver Kupffer cells and infiltrating immune cells 12 hpi. 
Representative of 2 experiments, each with 3-4 mice.  
(B) Zoomed in CD68 staining of 1 dpi lesion from Figure 1I.  
(C) Zoomed in IF staining of 5 dpi granuloma of indicated markers. Representative of 2 
experiments, each with 3-4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
(D) H&E staining of resolving granulomas with no necrotic core 14 dpi from Figure 3A.  
(E) WT liver sections stained with indicated IF markers 14 dpi. Representative of 2 experiments; 
each with 4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
 
Supplement Figure 2. Kinetics of granuloma resolution. 
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) Bacterial burdens in the liver at indicated dpi. Data combined from 2 experiments, each point 
is a single mouse.  
(B) Bacterial burdens from (A) displayed as % bacterial clearance. 
(C) Serial sections stained by H&E or indicated IHC markers of large granuloma from Figure 3A. 
(D) Representative whole liver sections stained with H&E used for percent active inflammation 
quantification from Figure 3G. Whole livers for 5, 7, 14, 21 dpi are same as whole livers in 
Figures 2A, 3A, and 3C. 
(E) Bacterial burdens from single granulomas 7 and 10 dpi. Representative of 2 experiments, 
each point is a single granuloma, each letter is a mouse. 
(F) WT granuloma stained for CD3 at 7dpi.  
(G) H&E staining of Rag1–/– livers at 26 dpi. Data represents one experiment with 3 mice. 
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line, median. 
 
Supplement Figure 3. Thrombosis, Ischemia, and other aspects of the granuloma.  
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) Isolate ischemia stained with H&E 3 dpi. Representative of 10 experiments, each with 3-4 
mice, multiple areas in section.  
(B) Adjacent ischemia stained with H&E 3 dpi. Representative of 10 experiments, each with 3-4 
mice, each with multiple areas in section.  
(C and D) Adjacent ischemia stained with H&E and IHC for C. violaceum 3 dpi. Representative 
of 10 experiments, each with 3-4 mice, each with multiple areas in section.  
(E) Clot stained with H&E 7 dpi. Arrows, fibrin strands. Representative of 5 experiments, each 
with 3-4 mice, each with multiple clots per section.  
(F) Table of total WT survival numbers from all survivals in paper. 
(G) NCR1gfp mice stained for indicated IHC marker 3 dpi. Arrows, NK cells. Representative of 
one experiment with 3 mice.  
(H) Survival analysis of Perf–/– mice. Data represents one experiment with 4 mice.  

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(I) Bacterial burdens from liver and spleen 19 dpi from (H), each point is a single mouse. 
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line data median. 
(J) Representative granuloma histology of WT, Perf–/–, and Casp7–/– mice at 3 dpi stained for 
H&E. Histopathology analyses were performed on livers from 4 mice per time point from one 
experiment. 
(K) IHC staining of C. violaceum dissemination in liver of Casp1–/–Casp11–/– (Casp1/11–/–) mice 
3 dpi. Arrows, disseminate bacteria. 
(L) IHC staining of C. violaceum dissemination in liver of Gsdmd–/– mice 3 dpi. Arrows, 
disseminate bacteria. 
 
Supplement Figure 4. Spatial transcriptomics of the granuloma. 
(A-F) Mice were infected i.p. with 1 x 104 CFU WT C. violaceum and one liver was harvested 
per indicated timepoint for spatial transcriptomics analysis.  
(A) H&E and spatial transcriptomic orientation of indicated clusters from all time points; same 
granuloma at 5 dpi from Figure 5A.  
(B) UMAP plot for cluster expression orientation for clusters from all timepoints of infection 
expressing Ptprc. 
(C) UMAP plot for cluster expression orientation for clusters from all timepoints of infection 
expressing Alb. 
(D) UMAP plot for cluster expression orientation for clusters’ location from all timepoints of 
infection within the granuloma architecture. 
(E) Table of genes used for calculating module scores in Figure 5D. 
 
Supplement Figure 5. Analysis of roles for gasdermin D, iNOS, and IRG1 in the 
granuloma.  
(A-G) Mice were infected with WT C. violaceum. 
(A) Bacterial burdens from C. violaceum incubated at indicated concentrations of DEA 
NONOate and Itaconic acid after 3 hours Data representative of 2 experiments, each point is a 
single culture. ****p<.0001, by Two-way ANOVA. 
(B) Survival analysis of WT and Acod1–/– mice. Data representative of 2 experiments, each with 
4-5 mice per genotype. ns, not significant, by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. 
(C) Bacterial burdens from liver 7 and 10 dpi. Data combined from 2 experiments, each point is 
a single mouse. ns, not significant, by Mann-Whitney (7 dpi) and Unpaired two-tailed t test (10 
dpi). 
(D) Survival analysis of Nos2–/– and littermate Nos2+/– mice. Data representative of one 
experiment, 4 Nos2–/– and 11 Nos2+/– mice. ****p<.0001, by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. 
(E) WT liver sections stained with indicated IF markers 1 and 3 dpi. Representative of 2 
experiments; each with 4 mice, each with multiple granulomas per section. 
(F) WT, Gsdmd–/–, and Nos2–/– mice stained with indicated IF markers 5 dpi. Same WT and 
Gsdmd–/– representative granulomas as Figure 7G. Representative of 2 experiments, each with 
3-4 mice per genotype, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
(G) Percent active inflammation quantified per whole liver section stained with H&E 3 dpi. Data 
representative of 2 experiments, each with 3-4 mice per genotype, each point is a single mouse. 
*p<0.05, by One-way ANOVA.   
(H) Percent active inflammation quantified per whole liver section stained with H&E 3 dpi. Data 
representative of 2 experiments, each with 3-4 mice per genotype, each point is a single mouse. 
*p<0.05, by One-way ANOVA. 
(I) UMAP plot for cluster expression orientation for clusters from all timepoints of infection 
expressing Nos2. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(J) WT, Gsdmd–/–, and Nos2–/– mice stained with indicated IF markers 5 dpi. Same WT and 
Gsdmd–/– representative granulomas as Figure 7G. Representative of 2 experiments, each with 
3-4 mice per genotype, each with multiple granulomas per section.  
Dashed line, limit of detection; solid line data median. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
1.Batista, J.H., and da Silva Neto, J.F. (2017). Chromobacterium violaceum Pathogenicity: 
Updates and Insights from Genome Sequencing of Novel Chromobacterium Species. Front 
Microbiol 8, 221310.3389/fmicb.2017.02213. 
2.Miki, T., Akiba, K., Iguchi, M., Danbara, H., and Okada, N. (2011). The Chromobacterium 
violaceum type III effector CopE, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1 and Cdc42, 
is involved in bacterial invasion of epithelial cells and pathogenesis. Mol Microbiol 80, 1186-
120310.1111/j.1365-2958.2011.07637.x. 
3.Maltez, V.I., Tubbs, A.L., Cook, K.D., Aachoui, Y., Falcone, E.L., Holland, S.M., Whitmire, 
J.K., and Miao, E.A. (2015). Inflammasomes Coordinate Pyroptosis and Natural Killer Cell 
Cytotoxicity to Clear Infection by a Ubiquitous Environmental Bacterium. Immunity 43, 987-
99710.1016/j.immuni.2015.10.010. 
4.A M Macher, T.B.C., A S Fauci (1982). Chronic granulomatous disease of childhood and 
Chromobacterium violaceum infections in the southeastern United States.  97, 51-
5510.7326/0003-4819-97-1-51. 
5.Nozaki, K., Maltez, V.I., Rayamajhi, M., Tubbs, A.L., Mitchell, J.E., Lacey, C.A., Harvest, C.K., 
Li, L., Nash, W.T., Larson, H.N., et al. (2022). Caspase-7 activates ASM to repair gasdermin 
and perforin pores. Nature 606, 960-96710.1038/s41586-022-04825-8. 
6.Peng, T., Tao, X., Xia, Z., Hu, S., Xue, J., Zhu, Q., Pan, X., Zhang, Q., and Li, S. (2022). 
Pathogen hijacks programmed cell death signaling by arginine ADPR-deacylization of 
caspases. Mol Cell 82, 1806-1820 e180810.1016/j.molcel.2022.03.010. 
7.Pagan, A.J., and Ramakrishnan, L. (2018). The Formation and Function of Granulomas. Annu 
Rev Immunol 36, 639-66510.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-100022. 
8.Shah, K.K., Pritt, B.S., and Alexander, M.P. (2017). Histopathologic review of granulomatous 
inflammation. J Clin Tuberc Other Mycobact Dis 7, 1-1210.1016/j.jctube.2017.02.001. 
9.Erika Heninger, L.H.H., Jozsef Karman, Sinarack Macvilay, Bjork Hill, Jon P. Woods, and 
Matyas Sandor (2006). Characterization of the Histoplasma capsulatum-Induced 
Granuloma. J Immunol 177, 3303-331310.4049/jimmunol.177.5.3303. 
10.Orme, I.M., and Basaraba, R.J. (2014). The formation of the granuloma in tuberculosis 
infection. Semin Immunol 26, 601-60910.1016/j.smim.2014.09.009. 
11.Timmermans, W.M., van Laar, J.A., van Hagen, P.M., and van Zelm, M.C. (2016). 
Immunopathogenesis of granulomas in chronic autoinflammatory diseases. Clin Transl 
Immunology 5, e11810.1038/cti.2016.75. 
12.Sorobetea, D., Matsuda, R., Peterson, S.T., Grayczyk, J.P., Rao, I., Krespan, E., Lanza, M., 
Assenmacher, C.-A., Beiting, D., Radaelli, E., et al. (2022). Inflammatory monocytes 
promote pyogranuloma formation to counteract Yersinia blockade of host defense. 
10.1101/2022.02.06.479204. 
13.Kaye, P.M., and Beattie, L. (2016). Lessons from other diseases: granulomatous 
inflammation in leishmaniasis. Semin Immunopathol 38, 249-26010.1007/s00281-015-0548-
7. 
14.Ramakrishnan, L. (2012). Revisiting the role of the granuloma in tuberculosis. Nat Rev 
Immunol 12, 352-36610.1038/nri3211. 
15.Schwartz, C., and Fallon, P.G. (2018). Schistosoma "Eggs-Iting" the Host: Granuloma 
Formation and Egg Excretion. Front Immunol 9, 249210.3389/fimmu.2018.02492. 
16.Madigan, C.A., Cameron, J., and Ramakrishnan, L. (2017). A Zebrafish Model of 
Mycobacterium leprae Granulomatous Infection. J Infect Dis 216, 776-
77910.1093/infdis/jix329. 
17.Matyas Sandor, J.V.W., and Thomas A. Wynn (2003). Granulomas in schistosome and 
mycobacterial infections: a model of local immune responses. TRENDS in Immunology 24, 
44-52 
18.Lamps, L.W. (2015). Hepatic Granulomas: A Review With Emphasis on Infectious Causes. 
Arch Pathol Lab Med 139, 867-87510.5858/arpa.2014-0123-RA. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
19.Cadena, A.M., Fortune, S.M., and Flynn, J.L. (2017). Heterogeneity in tuberculosis. Nat Rev 
Immunol 17, 691-70210.1038/nri.2017.69. 
20.Marakalala, M.J., Raju, R.M., Sharma, K., Zhang, Y.J., Eugenin, E.A., Prideaux, B., 
Daudelin, I.B., Chen, P.Y., Booty, M.G., Kim, J.H., et al. (2016). Inflammatory signaling in 
human tuberculosis granulomas is spatially organized. Nat Med 22, 531-
53810.1038/nm.4073. 
21.Egen, J.G., Rothfuchs, A.G., Feng, C.G., Winter, N., Sher, A., and Germain, R.N. (2008). 
Macrophage and T cell dynamics during the development and disintegration of 
mycobacterial granulomas. Immunity 28, 271-28410.1016/j.immuni.2007.12.010. 
22.Guirado, E., and Schlesinger, L.S. (2013). Modeling the Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
Granuloma - the Critical Battlefield in Host Immunity and Disease. Front Immunol 4, 
9810.3389/fimmu.2013.00098. 
23.Russell, D.G. (2007). Who puts the tubercle in tuberculosis? Nat Rev Microbiol 5, 39-
4710.1038/nrmicro1538. 
24.Lin, P.L., Ford, C.B., Coleman, M.T., Myers, A.J., Gawande, R., Ioerger, T., Sacchettini, J., 
Fortune, S.M., and Flynn, J.L. (2014). Sterilization of granulomas is common in active and 
latent tuberculosis despite within-host variability in bacterial killing. Nat Med 20, 75-
7910.1038/nm.3412. 
25.Zhan, L., Tang, J., Sun, M., and Qin, C. (2017). Animal Models for Tuberculosis in 
Translational and Precision Medicine. Front Microbiol 8, 71710.3389/fmicb.2017.00717. 
26.Bucsan, A.N., Mehra, S., Khader, S.A., and Kaushal, D. (2019). The current state of animal 
models and genomic approaches towards identifying and validating molecular determinants 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and tuberculosis disease. Pathog Dis 
7710.1093/femspd/ftz037. 
27.Mayer-Barber, K.D., Barber, D.L., Shenderov, K., White, S.D., Wilson, M.S., Cheever, A., 
Kugler, D., Hieny, S., Caspar, P., Nunez, G., et al. (2010). Caspase-1 independent IL-1beta 
production is critical for host resistance to mycobacterium tuberculosis and does not require 
TLR signaling in vivo. J Immunol 184, 3326-333010.4049/jimmunol.0904189. 
28.McElvania Tekippe, E., Allen, I.C., Hulseberg, P.D., Sullivan, J.T., McCann, J.R., Sandor, M., 
Braunstein, M., and Ting, J.P. (2010). Granuloma formation and host defense in chronic 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection requires PYCARD/ASC but not NLRP3 or caspase-1. 
PLoS One 5, e1232010.1371/journal.pone.0012320. 
29.Dorhoi, A., Nouailles, G., Jorg, S., Hagens, K., Heinemann, E., Pradl, L., Oberbeck-Muller, 
D., Duque-Correa, M.A., Reece, S.T., Ruland, J., et al. (2012). Activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is uncoupled from susceptibility to active 
tuberculosis. Eur J Immunol 42, 374-38410.1002/eji.201141548. 
30.Kauffman, K.D., Sakai, S., Lora, N.E., Namasivayam, S., Baker, P.J., Kamenyeva, O., 
Foreman, T.W., Nelson, C.E., Oliveira-de-Souza, D., Vinhaes, C.L., et al. (2021). PD-1 
blockade exacerbates Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in rhesus macaques. Sci 
Immunol 610.1126/sciimmunol.abf3861. 
31.Chai, Q., Yu, S., Zhong, Y., Lu, Z., Qiu, C., Yu, Y., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Lei, Z., Qiang, L., et 
al. (2022). A bacterial phospholipid phosphatase inhibits host pyroptosis by hijacking 
ubiquitin. Science 378, eabq013210.1126/science.abq0132. 
32.Yang, Y., Xu, P., He, P., Shi, F., Tang, Y., Guan, C., Zeng, H., Zhou, Y., Song, Q., Zhou, B., 
et al. (2020). Mycobacterial PPE13 activates inflammasome by interacting with the NATCH 
and LRR domains of NLRP3. FASEB J 34, 12820-1283310.1096/fj.202000200RR. 
33.Beckwith, K.S., Beckwith, M.S., Ullmann, S., Saetra, R.S., Kim, H., Marstad, A., Asberg, 
S.E., Strand, T.A., Haug, M., Niederweis, M., et al. (2020). Plasma membrane damage 
causes NLRP3 activation and pyroptosis during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Nat 
Commun 11, 227010.1038/s41467-020-16143-6. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
34.Zilu Qu1, J.Z., Yidan Zhou, Yan Xie, Yanjing Jiang, Jian Wu, Zuoqin Luo, Guanghui Liu, Lei 
Yin, Xiao-Lian Zhang (2020). Mycobacterial EST12 activates a RACK1–NLRP3–gasdermin 
D pyroptosis–IL-1 immune pathway. Science advances 610.1126/sciadv.aba4733. 
35.Liu, M., Zhang, S.S., Liu, D.N., Yang, Y.L., Wang, Y.H., and Du, G.H. (2021). Chrysomycin A 
Attenuates Neuroinflammation by Down-Regulating NLRP3/Cleaved Caspase-1 Signaling 
Pathway in LPS-Stimulated Mice and BV2 Cells. Int J Mol Sci 2210.3390/ijms22136799. 
36.Mishra, B.B., Moura-Alves, P., Sonawane, A., Hacohen, N., Griffiths, G., Moita, L.F., and 
Anes, E. (2010). Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein ESAT-6 is a potent activator of the 
NLRP3/ASC inflammasome. Cell Microbiol 12, 1046-106310.1111/j.1462-
5822.2010.01450.x. 
37.Saiga, H., Kitada, S., Shimada, Y., Kamiyama, N., Okuyama, M., Makino, M., Yamamoto, M., 
and Takeda, K. (2012). Critical role of AIM2 in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Int 
Immunol 24, 637-64410.1093/intimm/dxs062. 
38.Rastogi, S., Ellinwood, S., Augenstreich, J., Mayer-Barber, K.D., and Briken, V. (2021). 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis inhibits the NLRP3 inflammasome activation via its 
phosphokinase PknF. PLoS Pathog 17, e100971210.1371/journal.ppat.1009712. 
39.Kurane, T., Matsunaga, T., Ida, T., Sawada, K., Nishimura, A., Fukui, M., Umemura, M., 
Nakayama, M., Ohara, N., Matsumoto, S., et al. (2022). GRIM-19 is a target of 
mycobacterial Zn(2+) metalloprotease 1 and indispensable for NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation. FASEB J 36, e2209610.1096/fj.202101074RR. 
40.Master, S.S., Rampini, S.K., Davis, A.S., Keller, C., Ehlers, S., Springer, B., Timmins, G.S., 
Sander, P., and Deretic, V. (2008). Mycobacterium tuberculosis prevents inflammasome 
activation. Cell Host Microbe 3, 224-23210.1016/j.chom.2008.03.003. 
41.Subbarao, S., Sanchez-Garrido, J., Krishnan, N., Shenoy, A.R., and Robertson, B.D. (2020). 
Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of inflammasomes reduces the survival of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains in macrophages. Sci Rep 10, 370910.1038/s41598-020-
60560-y. 
42.Adigun, R., Basit, H., and Murray, J. (2022). Cell Liquefactive Necrosis. In StatPearls 
(Treasure Island (FL))https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28613685 
43.Miki, T., Iguchi, M., Akiba, K., Hosono, M., Sobue, T., Danbara, H., and Okada, N. (2010). 
Chromobacterium pathogenicity island 1 type III secretion system is a major virulence 
determinant for Chromobacterium violaceum-induced cell death in hepatocytes. Mol 
Microbiol 77, 855-87210.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07248.x. 
44.Giacomini, E., Iona, E., Ferroni, L., Miettinen, M., Fattorini, L., Orefici, G., Julkunen, I., and 
Coccia, E.M. (2001). Infection of human macrophages and dendritic cells with 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis induces a differential cytokine gene expression that modulates 
T cell response. J Immunol 166, 7033-704110.4049/jimmunol.166.12.7033. 
45.Nozaki, K., Li, L., and Miao, E.A. (2022). Innate Sensors Trigger Regulated Cell Death to 
Combat Intracellular Infection. Annu Rev Immunol 40, 469-49810.1146/annurev-immunol-
101320-011235. 
46.Su, Q., Kim, S.Y., Adewale, F., Zhou, Y., Aldler, C., Ni, M., Wei, Y., Burczynski, M.E., Atwal, 
G.S., Sleeman, M.W., et al. (2021). Single-cell RNA transcriptome landscape of hepatocytes 
and non-parenchymal cells in healthy and NAFLD mouse liver. iScience 24, 
10323310.1016/j.isci.2021.103233. 
47.Remmerie, A., Martens, L., Thone, T., Castoldi, A., Seurinck, R., Pavie, B., Roels, J., 
Vanneste, B., De Prijck, S., Vanhockerhout, M., et al. (2020). Osteopontin Expression 
Identifies a Subset of Recruited Macrophages Distinct from Kupffer Cells in the Fatty Liver. 
Immunity 53, 641-657 e61410.1016/j.immuni.2020.08.004. 
48.Mattila, J.T., Ojo, O.O., Kepka-Lenhart, D., Marino, S., Kim, J.H., Eum, S.Y., Via, L.E., Barry, 
C.E., 3rd, Klein, E., Kirschner, D.E., et al. (2013). Microenvironments in tuberculous 
granulomas are delineated by distinct populations of macrophage subsets and expression of 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
nitric oxide synthase and arginase isoforms. J Immunol 191, 773-
78410.4049/jimmunol.1300113. 
49.Mishra, B.B., Rathinam, V.A., Martens, G.W., Martinot, A.J., Kornfeld, H., Fitzgerald, K.A., 
and Sassetti, C.M. (2013). Nitric oxide controls the immunopathology of tuberculosis by 
inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome-dependent processing of IL-1beta. Nat Immunol 14, 52-
6010.1038/ni.2474. 
50.Mishra, B.B., Lovewell, R.R., Olive, A.J., Zhang, G., Wang, W., Eugenin, E., Smith, C.M., 
Phuah, J.Y., Long, J.E., Dubuke, M.L., et al. (2017). Nitric oxide prevents a pathogen-
permissive granulocytic inflammation during tuberculosis. Nat Microbiol 2, 
1707210.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.72. 
51.Nair, S., Huynh, J.P., Lampropoulou, V., Loginicheva, E., Esaulova, E., Gounder, A.P., Boon, 
A.C.M., Schwarzkopf, E.A., Bradstreet, T.R., Edelson, B.T., et al. (2018). Irg1 expression in 
myeloid cells prevents immunopathology during M. tuberculosis infection. J Exp Med 215, 
1035-104510.1084/jem.20180118. 
52.Bomfim, C.C.B., Fisher, L., Amaral, E.P., Mittereder, L., McCann, K., Correa, A.A.S., 
Namasivayam, S., Swamydas, M., Moayeri, M., Weiss, J.M., et al. (2022). Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis Induces Irg1 in Murine Macrophages by a Pathway Involving Both TLR-2 and 
STING/IFNAR Signaling and Requiring Bacterial Phagocytosis. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 
12, 86258210.3389/fcimb.2022.862582. 
53.O'Neill, L.A.J., and Artyomov, M.N. (2019). Itaconate: the poster child of metabolic 
reprogramming in macrophage function. Nat Rev Immunol 19, 273-28110.1038/s41577-019-
0128-5. 
54.Chen, M., Sun, H., Boot, M., Shao, L., Chang, S.J., Wang, W., Lam, T.T., Lara-Tejero, M., 
Rego, E.H., and Galan, J.E. (2020). Itaconate is an effector of a Rab GTPase cell-
autonomous host defense pathway against Salmonella. Science 369, 450-
45510.1126/science.aaz1333. 
55.Zhang, B., Lakshmanan, J., Du, Y., Smith, J.W., and Harbrecht, B.G. (2018). Cell-specific 
regulation of iNOS by AMP-activated protein kinase in primary rat hepatocytes. J Surg Res 
221, 104-11210.1016/j.jss.2017.08.028. 
56.Anavi, S., and Tirosh, O. (2020). iNOS as a metabolic enzyme under stress conditions. Free 
Radic Biol Med 146, 16-3510.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2019.10.411. 
57.Mecsas, J. (2019). Unraveling neutrophil- Yersinia interactions during tissue infection. 
F1000Res 810.12688/f1000research.18940.1. 
58.Zhang, Y., Khairallah, C., Sheridan, B.S., van der Velden, A.W.M., and Bliska, J.B. (2018). 
CCR2(+) Inflammatory Monocytes Are Recruited to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis 
Pyogranulomas and Dictate Adaptive Responses at the Expense of Innate Immunity during 
Oral Infection. Infect Immun 8610.1128/IAI.00782-17. 
59.Peterson, L.W., Philip, N.H., DeLaney, A., Wynosky-Dolfi, M.A., Asklof, K., Gray, F., Choa, 
R., Bjanes, E., Buza, E.L., Hu, B., et al. (2017). RIPK1-dependent apoptosis bypasses 
pathogen blockade of innate signaling to promote immune defense. J Exp Med 214, 3171-
318210.1084/jem.20170347. 
60.Davis, K.M., Mohammadi, S., and Isberg, R.R. (2015). Community behavior and spatial 
regulation within a bacterial microcolony in deep tissue sites serves to protect against host 
attack. Cell Host Microbe 17, 21-3110.1016/j.chom.2014.11.008. 
61.Davis, K.M. (2018). All Yersinia Are Not Created Equal: Phenotypic Adaptation to Distinct 
Niches Within Mammalian Tissues. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 8, 
26110.3389/fcimb.2018.00261. 
62.Lovewell, R.R., Baer, C.E., Mishra, B.B., Smith, C.M., and Sassetti, C.M. (2021). 
Granulocytes act as a niche for Mycobacterium tuberculosis growth. Mucosal Immunol 14, 
229-24110.1038/s41385-020-0300-z. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
63.Huang, L., Nazarova, E.V., Tan, S., Liu, Y., and Russell, D.G. (2018). Growth of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in vivo segregates with host macrophage metabolism and 
ontogeny. J Exp Med 215, 1135-115210.1084/jem.20172020. 
64.Dallenga, T., Repnik, U., Corleis, B., Eich, J., Reimer, R., Griffiths, G.W., and Schaible, U.E. 
(2017). M. tuberculosis-Induced Necrosis of Infected Neutrophils Promotes Bacterial Growth 
Following Phagocytosis by Macrophages. Cell Host Microbe 22, 519-530 
e51310.1016/j.chom.2017.09.003. 
65.Yang, C.T., Cambier, C.J., Davis, J.M., Hall, C.J., Crosier, P.S., and Ramakrishnan, L. 
(2012). Neutrophils exert protection in the early tuberculous granuloma by oxidative killing of 
mycobacteria phagocytosed from infected macrophages. Cell Host Microbe 12, 301-
31210.1016/j.chom.2012.07.009. 
66.Cohen, S.B., Gern, B.H., Delahaye, J.L., Adams, K.N., Plumlee, C.R., Winkler, J.K., 
Sherman, D.R., Gerner, M.Y., and Urdahl, K.B. (2018). Alveolar Macrophages Provide an 
Early Mycobacterium tuberculosis Niche and Initiate Dissemination. Cell Host Microbe 24, 
439-446 e43410.1016/j.chom.2018.08.001. 
67.Yaxin Liu, H.Z., Yanjie Hou, Zilin Li, Lin Li, Xiaocui Song, Jingjin Ding, Feng Sha, Yue Xu 
(2022). Calmodulin Binding Activates Chromobacterium CopC Effector to ADP-Riboxanate 
Host Apoptotic Caspases. mBio 1310.1128/mbio.00690-22. 
68.Nan Meng, M.X., Ya-Qi Lu, Mi Wang, Krishna M. Boini, Pin-Lan Li and, and Tang, W.-X. 
(2016). Activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes in mouse hepatic stellate cells during 
Schistosoma J. infection. Oncotarget 7, 39316-3933110.18632/oncotarget.10044. 
69.Liu, X., Zhang, Y.-R., Cai, C., Ni, X.-Q., Zhu, Q., Ren, J.-L., Chen, Y., Zhang, L.-S., Xue, C.-
D., Zhao, J., et al. (2019). Taurine Alleviates Schistosoma-Induced Liver Injury by Inhibiting 
the TXNIP/NLRP3 Inflammasome Signal Pathway and Pyroptosis. Infection and Immunity 
8710.1128/iai.00732-19. 
70.Sanches, R.C.O., Souza, C., Marinho, F.V., Mambelli, F.S., Morais, S.B., Guimaraes, E.S., 
and Oliveira, S.C. (2020). NLRP6 Plays an Important Role in Early Hepatic 
Immunopathology Caused by Schistosoma mansoni Infection. Front Immunol 11, 
79510.3389/fimmu.2020.00795. 
71.Huppertz, C., Jager, B., Wieczorek, G., Engelhard, P., Oliver, S.J., Bauernfeind, F.G., 
Littlewood-Evans, A., Welte, T., Hornung, V., and Prasse, A. (2020). The NLRP3 
inflammasome pathway is activated in sarcoidosis and involved in granuloma formation. Eur 
Respir J 5510.1183/13993003.00119-2019. 
72.K Heran Darwin, S.E., José-Carlos Gutierrez-Ramos, Nadine Weich, Carl F Nathan (2003). 
The proteasome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is required for resistance to nitric oxide. 
Science 302, 1963-196610.1126/science.1091176. 
73.Pichugin, A.V., Yan, B.S., Sloutsky, A., Kobzik, L., and Kramnik, I. (2009). Dominant role of 
the sst1 locus in pathogenesis of necrotizing lung granulomas during chronic tuberculosis 
infection and reactivation in genetically resistant hosts. Am J Pathol 174, 2190-
220110.2353/ajpath.2009.081075. 
74.Chacon-Salinas, R., Serafin-Lopez, J., Ramos-Payan, R., Mendez-Aragon, P., Hernandez-
Pando, R., Van Soolingen, D., Flores-Romo, L., Estrada-Parra, S., and Estrada-Garcia, I. 
(2005). Differential pattern of cytokine expression by macrophages infected in vitro with 
different Mycobacterium tuberculosis genotypes. Clin Exp Immunol 140, 443-
44910.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02797.x. 
75.K Kuida, J.A.L., G Ku, M W Harding, D J Livingston, M S Su, R A Flavell (1995). Altered 
cytokine export and apoptosis in mice deficient in interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme. 
Science 267, 2000-200310.1126/science.7535475. 
76.Rauch, I., Deets, K.A., Ji, D.X., von Moltke, J., Tenthorey, J.L., Lee, A.Y., Philip, N.H., Ayres, 
J.S., Brodsky, I.E., Gronert, K., et al. (2017). NAIP-NLRC4 Inflammasomes Coordinate 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Intestinal Epithelial Cell Expulsion with Eicosanoid and IL-18 Release via Activation of 
Caspase-1 and -8. Immunity 46, 649-65910.1016/j.immuni.2017.03.016. 
77.Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut, P., Chaisson, 
M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 
29, 15-2110.1093/bioinformatics/bts635. 
78.Genomics, x. What is Loupe Browser? (Official 10x Genomics Support 
[Online])https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-
expression/software/visualization/latest/what-is-loupe-cell-browser. 
79.Satija, R. (2022). Analysis, visualization, and integration of spatial datasets with Seurat 
https://satijalab.org/seurat/articles/spatial_vignette.html. 
80.McInnes, L., Healy, J., and Melville, J. (2020). UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and 
Projection for Dimension Reduction (arXiv:1802.03426  
[stat.ML])doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.03426. 
81.Tirosh, I., Izar, B., Prakadan, S.M., Wadsworth, M.H., 2nd, Treacy, D., Trombetta, J.J., 
Rotem, A., Rodman, C., Lian, C., Murphy, G., et al. (2016). Dissecting the multicellular 
ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352, 189-
19610.1126/science.aad0501. 
82.Hao, Y., Hao, S., Andersen-Nissen, E., Mauck, W.M., 3rd, Zheng, S., Butler, A., Lee, M.J., 
Wilk, A.J., Darby, C., Zager, M., et al. (2021). Integrated analysis of multimodal single-cell 
data. Cell 184, 3573-3587 e352910.1016/j.cell.2021.04.048. 
83.Aranda, P.S., LaJoie, D.M., and Jorcyk, C.L. (2012). Bleach gel: a simple agarose gel for 
analyzing RNA quality. Electrophoresis 33, 366-36910.1002/elps.201100335. 
84.Jian Ye, G.C., Irena Zaretskaya, Ioana Cutcutache, Steve Rozen & Thomas L Madden 
(2012). Primer-BLAST: A tool to design target-specific primers for polymerase chain 
reaction. BMC Bioinformatics 1310.1186/1471-2105-13-134. 
85.V E Laubach, E.G.S., O Smithies, P A Sherman (1995). 
Micelackinginduciblenitricoxidesynthasearenotresistanttolipopolysaccharide-induceddeath. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92, 10688-1069210.1073/pnas.92.23.10688. 
86.Taylor, S.C., Nadeau, K., Abbasi, M., Lachance, C., Nguyen, M., and Fenrich, J. (2019). The 
Ultimate qPCR Experiment: Producing Publication Quality, Reproducible Data the First 
Time. Trends Biotechnol 37, 761-77410.1016/j.tibtech.2018.12.002. 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure( w1h.i ch was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A B C D Necrotic Core E Coagulative Necrosis F Macropahge Zone
*
*
^
5000 µm  500µm 50 µm 50 µm 50 µm
G
ns
ma106
ulo I H&E C. violaceum C. violaceum
n
egra104
gl
n
U/si
F102
C
WT∆vioA Mix
3DPI
H C. violaceum
100µm
500µm
CD68 Ly6G Ly6G
25 µm
J
103
106
n
FU/ liver104 FU/splee102
C C
102 100µm
6 12 18 24 6 12 18 24
HPI HPI
K L
H&E C. violaceum Ly6G
✱✱
1200
eas 800
ar
m+ 600
olaceu 400 WT
vi 200
C.
# 0
WT Ncf1–/–
12HPI 100µm
–
–/
1
cf
N
100µm

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 2. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A 1 DPI 3 DPI 5 DPI 7 DPI
5000 µm 5000 µm 5000 µm 5000 µm
B H&E C. violaceum Ly6G CD68 Sirius Red
PI
D
3 
500 µm
PI
D
5 
500 µm
PI
D
7 
500 µm
C
C. violaceum         Ly6G            CD68            DAPI D C.violaceum
^
PI PI PI ^
D D D ^
1  3  3  ^
500 µm 500 µm 100 µm
PI PI
D D
5  7 
500 µm 500 µm

NEW PAGE

bioRFxiivg purerperi n3t d. oi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A 14 DPI B H&E C. violaceum
5000 µm
500 µm
Sirius Red Ly6G CD68
C D
21 DPI H&E C. violaceum Ly6G CD68 CD3 Sirius Red
5000 µm  200 µm
E F G H I ns
Liver
✱✱
CFU/ liver111100002468 %MiceClearedInfection124680000000 ActiveLiverInflammation12000 CFU/liver111100002468 ns ns ns WRaTg1–/– CFU/ liver111100002468 CFU/spleen11001.22
3  7 14DP2I12835 3714D2P1I2835 % 3 5D7PI1421 3 10 21 WTRag1–/– 37DPI WTRag1–/–
DPI
J K L WT Rag1–/–
on100 100
ecti 80 80
nf
MiceClearedI 246000 %Survival 246000 WRaTg1–/– ns 3 DPI
%
0 0
WTRag1–/– 0 3 6 9121518212427
37DPI DPI
5000 µm 5000 µm
500 µm 500 µm

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 4. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A B C
3 DPI 3 DPI
100 ✱✱ ✱✱✱ ✱✱✱✱ 105 ✱✱✱✱
%Survival 468000 WCGasTsdpm1d/1–1/––/– ✱✱✱✱ CFU/ liver111000846 CFU/ spleen 110046 CFU/ liver111000468 CFU/ spleen110034
20 102
102
102 102
0
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 WTCasp1/11–/– WT Casp1/11–/– WTGsdmd–/– WTGsdmd–/–
DPI
D E
WT Casp1/11–/– WT Gsdmd–/–
PI
D
3 
5000 µm
WT Casp1/11–/–
F H&E C. violaceum C. violaceum H&E C. violaceum C. violaceum
PI500 µm 100 µm 500 µm[ [ 100 µm
D
3  Ly6G CD68 CD68 Ly6G CD68 CD68
100 µm 100 µm
WT Gsdmd–/–
G
H&E C. violaceum C. violaceum H&E C. violaceum C. violaceum
[
100 µm 100 µm
DPI500 µm [ 500 µm
3  Ly6G CD68 CD68 Ly6G CD68 CD68
100 µm 100 µm

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 5. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A WT, 5 DPI B 6 All Clusters C 6 CD45+ Clusters
0 13
1 5 10 NC-C EC
2 3 3
45689 UMAP_20 911 6 0 1 7123144 UMAP_20 CNNCC-NP-M2M HEP
10 -3 8 2 -3 CN-M1
11 15 OG
12
500 µm 14 -6 -5 0 5 -6 -5 0 5
UMAP_1 UMAP_1
D
Neutrophil  Monocyte  Macrophage  T Cell  Fibroblast 
4 4 4 4 4
e
or
Sc2 2 2 2 2
e 
ul
d0 0 0 0 0
o
M
-2 -2 -2 -2 -2
0.5 1 3 5 7 10 14 21 0.5 1 3 5 7 10 14 21 0.5 1 3 5 7 10 14 21 0.5 1 3 5 7 10 14 21 0.5 1 3 5 7 10 14 21
DPI DPI DPI DPI DPI
E
F
Cluster # Name
S100a9   Cd68  Ccr2 
5 NC-C 0 1 2 3 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 1.0 0.5 1.5 2.0
11 NC-P
0
p. 25
9 CN Ex 50
%  75
8 CN-M1 100
e
n
o
Z 6 CN-M2 p. 2
0 M ge Ex 1
era 0 Trac  Col1a1  Alb 
Av -1 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4
15 OG
1,2,3,4, HEP
7,12,14
10,13 EC
NeutrophilMonocyteMacrophagMeodT CuellleFibroblastHepatocyEtnedothelial Cell

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure( w6h.i ch was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A B 3 DPI C 5 DPI D 7 DPI
100 108 ns 102 108 ✱ ✱✱✱✱ 1010 ✱✱ ns
Survival (%)24680000 WNoTs2–/– ✱✱✱✱ CFU/ liver110046 CFU/ spleen ns CFU/ liver110046 CFU/ spleen102 CFU/ liver111000468 CFU/ spleen111000234
0 102 101.2 102 102
0 3 6 9 12151821 WT Nos2–/– WT Nos2–/– WT Nos2–/– WT Nos2–/– WT Nos2–/– WT Nos2–/–
DPI
E 5 DPI H&E C. violaceum Ly6G CD68 Sirius Red
T
W
5000 µm 500 µm
–
–/
2
s
o
N
5000 µm 500 µm
F G 12 HPI 24 HPI 3 DPI 5 DPI Nos2 
8000 ✱✱✱✱ 3
Neutrophil +CD68)G–4000 ns 12
Total(Ly6 0
0
3 7
DPI 2000 µm
ns 7 DPI 10 DPI 14 DPI 21 DPI
12000 ✱
WT
TotalMacrophage +CD68)(Ly6G–48000000 Nos2–/–
0
3 7
DPI

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.07.531568; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
Figure 7. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A B C D E ✱✱✱✱
✱
NormalizedNos2Expression 0246 WT✱Gs✱d✱md–✱/– Total[NitrateandNitrite]125000369000000000 WGTsd✱md–/–Nos2–/– CFU/SingleGranuloma111110000045678 WNCTo✱asns2✱–✱ps/–1✱/✱1G✱1✱–s/d–✱md–/– %ActiveLiverInflammation1230000 WTNo✱s2–/G–✱sdmd–/– GranulomaArchitectureScore 01234 WT  ✱✱✱✱N5o DsP2I–/– Gsdmd–/–
4 DPI 4 DPI 3 DPI 5 DPI
F
H&E CD68 Ly6G C. violaceum
–
–/2 
s
o
N
500 µm
7 DPI
G 5 DPI
T
W 100 µm
Inner Macrophage zone
500 µm Outer Macrophage zone
–/–d
m
d
Gs 100 µm
iNOS
CD68
Ly6G
DAPI
500 µm

NEW PAGE