bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Integration of Avidity and Differentiation is enabled by CD8+ T-cell sensing of IFN-γ 
 
Lion F.K. Uhl*, Han Cai*, Jagdish N. Mahale*, Andrew J. MacLean*, Julie M. Mazet*, Alexander J. He*, 
Doreen Lau$, Tim Elliott$, and Audrey Gerard*‡ 
 
* The Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology and $ Centre for Immuno-oncology, Nuffield Department 
of Medicine, University of Oxford. 
‡ Corresponding author Audrey.gerard@kennedy.ox.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
The most effective responses to intracellular pathogens have a breadth of T-cell clones with 
different affinities for their cognate peptide, and a diversity of functional phenotypes, from effector 
to long-lived memory cells. While high- and low-affinity T-cells are inherently skewed towards 
becoming effector and memory, respectively, overall, both functional subsets exploit a wide range of 
affinities. How the breadth of affinities and functionalities are coordinated is therefore unclear. In this 
study, we provide evidence that direct sensing of the cytokine IFN-γ by CD8+ T-cells is a factor 
controlling the integration of T-cell affinity and differentiation during infection. IFN-γ increases the 
expansion of low-affinity T-cells, allowing them to overcome the selective advantage of high-affinity 
T-cells. Concomitantly, IFN-γ reinforces high-affinity T-cell entry into the memory pool. As a result, 
direct IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells increases the avidity of the memory response. This comes at the 
expense of the primary T-cell response, for which IFN-γ decreases the avidity, leading to sub-optimum 
immunity to infection. IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells is paracrine, provided by a distinct subset of CD8+ 
T-cells called Virtual Memory T-cells, an antigen inexperienced subset that harbors memory features. 
Overall, we propose that IFN-γ and Virtual Memory T-cells fulfil a critical immunoregulatory role by 
enabling the coordination of T-cell avidity and fate. 
 
    
  1 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Introduction 
CD8+ T-cells are critical for clearing intracellular pathogens and tumors. The efficacy of CD8+ T-cell 
responses relies on a breadth of different clones, the formation of a strong effector cytotoxic 
response, as well as the generation of memory cells that will provide enhanced protection upon 
rechallenge (Stemberger et al. 2007; Wong and Pamer 2003). T-cell differentiation into effector or 
memory is regulated by multiple factors, including T-cell receptor (TCR) affinity for its cognate peptide, 
costimulatory signals and cytokines (Kaech and Cui 2012). Despite considerable work, how those 
different factors are integrated to generate a robust albeit diverse short- and long-term response 
remains mostly unknown. 
Avidity represents the capacity of T-cells to recognize infected cells and in turn elicit effector 
functions (Laugel et al. 2007). To estimate the avidity of an endogenous T-cell response, pMHC 
tetramers, which bind multivalently and often predict functional responses, are often used (Pace et 
al. 2012; van Gisbergen et al. 2011). But because the tetramer itself and the staining method can 
impact the range of discrimination between T-cell clones of different avidities (Dolton et al. 2015), this 
is not always used as a quantitative measure. The average avidity of the T-cell response is typically 
assessed by quantifying the up-regulation of activation markers (such as CD69) or effector functions 
(such as IFN-γ production) following stimulation of T-cells with increasing concentrations of cognate 
peptide (Ioannidou et al. 2017; Viganò et al. 2012). Small variations of those avidity measures in the 
T-cell response towards a given pathogen can have drastic consequences. For example, during  COVID-
19 infection, hospitalized patients have only 3-4-fold lower average T-cell avidity to spike antigens 
than patients with milder disease (Bacher et al. 2020). Small differences in TCR avidity can also impact 
tolerance, as an increase in TCR avidity of <2-fold towards a self-antigen is enough to break tolerance 
in a mouse model of diabetes (King et al. 2012). This indicates that the average avidity of an 
endogenous response has to be tightly regulated. 
Together with co-receptors and co-stimulatory molecules, TCR affinity is an important factor 
controlling the avidity of the T-cell response (Pettmann et al. 2021). High-affinity T-cell clones are 
sufficient  to  control  infections  (Alexander-Miller  2005).  They  have  a  competitive  advantage  in 
interacting with antigen-presenting cells and expand better (Butz and Bevan 1998; Smith, Wikstrom, 
and Fazekas de 2000). Despite these selective advantages, large clonal breadth with the presence of 
low-affinity T-cells are consistently observed (Martinez et al. 2016; Martinez and Evavold 2015; Zehn, 
Lee, and Bevan 2009) during an immune response, suggesting the existence of active regulatory 
mechanisms.  
TCR affinity regulates CD8+ T-cell recruitment to an immune response, but also their fate. When a 
single CD8+ T-cell clone recognizes its cognate with high-affinity, its fate is biased towards effector 
differentiation, whereas priming of the same clone with low-affinity peptide results in memory 
skewing (Kaech and Cui 2012; Solouki et al. 2020). However, a breadth of affinities is found throughout 
immune  responses  (Martinez  et  al.  2016;  Martinez  and  Evavold  2015),  suggesting  that  clonal 
repartition over differentiation states is actively regulated. Cells bearing the same TCR can lead to 
heterogenous differentiation patterns (Buchholz et al. 2013; Gerlach et al. 2013; Stemberger et al. 
2007), further supporting the notion that additional factors regulate the relationship between 
differentiation and TCR affinity.  
This overall suggests that regulation of T-cell avidity throughout an immune response requires the 
co-regulation of differentiation and affinity. A co-regulation implies that T-cells have to directly receive 
and integrate the multiple cues. IFN-γ is a cytokine that controls CD8+ T-cell differentiation, expansion 
(Gérard et al. 2013; Krummel et al. 2018; Sercan et al. 2010; Whitmire 2011; Tewari, Nakayama, and 
Suresh 2007; Badovinac, Tvinnereim, and Harty 2000) and the immunodominance of the T-cell 
response (Badovinac, Tvinnereim, and Harty 2000). Because IFN-γ regulates T-cell responses in part 
through direct signaling in T-cells (Gérard et al. 2013; Krummel et al. 2018; Tewari, Nakayama, and 
Suresh 2007; Whitmire et al. 2007), it is a strong candidate for regulating avidity throughout an 
immune response.  
  2 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Here, we present evidence that direct IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells coordinate avidity and 
differentiation during an immune response. By deleting the receptor of IFN-γ in CD8+ T-cells, we 
demonstrated that IFN-γ limits the expansion of high-affinity T-cells, while increasing the expansion 
of low-affinity T-cells and skewing their differentiation towards effector. As a result, IFN-γ lowers the 
avidity of the primary response, while increasing the avidity of the memory response. Importantly, 
the regulation of avidity by IFN-γ has profound consequences, resulting in sub-optimum primary 
immunity towards viral infection, a trade-off leading to improved memory responses. IFN-γ signaling 
in CD8+ T-cells occurs during priming, where it is provided by a specific CD8+ T-cell subset, called Virtual 
Memory T-cells (T ). We propose that T  cells fulfil a critical immunoregulatory role in modulating 
VM VM
collective T-cell behavior. Overall, our data demonstrate that IFN-γ coordinate T-cell breadth and fate 
to allow for a retention of T-cell affinities throughout the immune response and a balance between 
short- and long-term immune responses. 
   
  3 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Results 
IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells results in sub-optimum immunity to Influenza. 
Given  the  tight  regulation  of  T  cell  responses  in  terms  of  avidity  and  differentiation,  we 
hypothesized that inhibiting the factors intrinsically regulating these two features would have major 
consequences on CD8+ T cell-dependent immune responses. Because IFN-γ has been implicated in 
controlling the immunodominance and differentiation during infection and can act directly on T-cells, 
we focused on IFN-γ and first determined the consequence of blocking IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells 
for viral responses. To this aim, we deleted the IFN-γR in CD8+ T-cells by crossing the E8I-Cre model 
(Maekawa et al. 2008) to IFN-γR1flox/flox mice (Lee et al. 2013) (CD8-IFN-γRKO). IFN-γR deletion was 
specific for CD8+ T-cells, as assessed by IFN-γR1 staining (Fig.S1A). This was confirmed by crossing 
Cd8a-Cre to ROSA-Tomato mice, where Tomato expression was used as a read-out of Cre expression 
(Fig.S1B). CD8-IFN-γRKO or control mice (WT) mice were infected with the Influenza virus strain X31 
expressing OVA (X31-OVA) and their weight was monitored over time as a general read-out of control 
of the infection. Overall, CD8-IFN-γRKO mice lost less weight than WT mice (Fig.1A-B) following 
infection with a sub-lethal dose of X31-OVA. WT mice exhibited impaired survival when infected with 
a higher dose of X31-OVA, while CD8-IFN-γRKO mice recovered (Fig.1C-D). We concluded that IFN-γ-
sensing by CD8+ T-cells results in sub-optimum effector responses against Influenza.  
We then investigated the mechanism by which IFN-γ regulated CD8+ T-cell responses to Influenza 
infection. We tested whether increased cytotoxicity may be responsible for enhanced resistance to 
Influenza infection in CD8-IFN-γRKO mice. Using in vivo cytotoxicity assay, we found that killing was 
efficient in both WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO mice  (Fig.1E-F). In addition, ex vivo surface expression of 
lysosome-associated membrane protein-1 (LAMP-1), a marker of cytotoxic CD8+ T-cell degranulation, 
was comparable between WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO CD8+ T-cells (Fig.1G). This demonstrates that the sub-
optimum CD8+ T-cell immunity induced by IFN-γ sensing was not the result of impaired intrinsic 
cytotoxic functions. Because IFN-γ is known to regulate expansion and trafficking (Bhat et al. 2017; 
Castro et al. 2018), we then investigated whether the increased control by CD8+ T cells was due to 
increased cell number in the lung. The number and fraction of lung OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells, analyzed 
by Kb-N4 tetramer staining (Fig. S1C), at the peak of the infection was equivalent between CD8-IFN-
γRKO and WT T-cells (Fig.1H-I), indicating that IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-cells did not regulate their 
overall expansion/recruitment to effector sites.  
As  effector  function  and  recruitment  were  largely  unaffected  by  IFN-γ  sensing,  we  then 
investigated whether IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells affected the average avidity of the T-cell response. 
We analyzed Kb-N4 tetramer binding of lung CD8+ T-cells and normalized the Mean Fluorescence 
Intensity (MFI) by CD3 expression in order to extract the relative affinity, a measure of TCR affinity 
and/or avidity at the population level (Pace et al. 2012). CD8-IFN-γRKO T-cells exhibited increased 
relative affinity (Fig.1J), indicating that IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells lowers the avidity of primary 
responses, leading to sub-optimum immunity to Influenza.  
IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells decreases the avidity of the primary T-cell response. 
To explore whether the regulation of avidity by IFN-γ was a general mechanism, we switched to 
another model of infection, Listeria monocytogenes (LM) expressing Ovalbumin (OVA), an intracellular 
pathogen for which CD8+ T-cell response is well characterized. This model also allows us to alter the 
affinity and avidity of CD8+ T-cell responses by using LM expressing the dominant OVA peptide 
recognized by CD8+ T-cells (N4) or altered OVA peptides of lower affinity.  
We first tested whether the avidity of CD8+ T-cell primary responses was also affected by IFN-γ 
sensing following LM infection. CD8-IFN-γRKO or WT mice were infected with LM expressing OVA (LM-
OVA) and OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells were analyzed by Kb-N4 tetramer staining. In this system, 
expansion of endogenous OVA-specific T-cells was increased in CD8-IFN-γRKO mice (Fig.2A), most likely 
because the spleen is both a priming and effector site during LM infection. In addition, OVA-specific 
T-cells exhibited a significant shift in tetramer binding towards higher MFI (Fig.2B-C). As for Influenza 
infection, normalizing tetramer binding by CD3 or TCR expression to extract relative avidity measures 
  4 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
indicated that CD8-IFN-γRKO CD8+ T-cells were of higher avidity compared to their control counterparts 
(Fig.S2A-C).  This  was  not  a  consequence  of  increased  LM-OVA  load  (Fig.S2D),  increased  IFN-γ 
production (Fig.S2E) or differential priming, as assessed by CD69 upregulation (Fig.S2F). This was also 
not the result of early egress of low-affinity T-cells, as the increased tetramer binding in CD8-IFN-γRKO 
CD8+ T-cells was already present 5 days after infection (Fig.S2G). 
Our data indicate that IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-cells lowers the avidity of the primary response in 
two different infection models. We then sought to quantify the difference in avidity between WT and 
CD8-IFN-γRKO CD8+ T-cell responses. We measured IFN-γ production following stimulation of CD8+ T-
cells with increasing concentrations of the OVA peptide (N4) ex vivo. IFN-γ expression by WT and CD8-
IFN-γRKO T-cells were similar in magnitude (Fig.2D) but the EC  was decreased for CD8-IFN-γRKO 
50
compared to WT CD8+ T-cells, both by flow cytometry (Fig.2E-F) and ELISA (Fig.2G-H), indicating a 
higher avidity of the CD8-IFN-γRKO T-cell repertoire. This demonstrated that IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-
cells decreases the avidity of the primary response by about 2-4-fold. We validated this result by 
quantifying OVA-specific CD8+ T-cell avidity by dynamic acoustic force measurements. Endogenous 
OVA-specific T-cells from WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO mice were isolated at the peak of LM-OVA infection 
and allowed to adhere on a flow chamber containing a monolayer of Kb+, OVA-expressing cells. 
Increasing acoustic force was then applied and T-cell detachment from the monolayer was monitored 
by microscopy. Using this method, we confirmed that CD8-IFN-γRKO OVA-specific T-cells displayed 
increased avidity compared with WT T-cells (Fig.2I-J). Taken together, we demonstrated that IFN-γ-
sensing by CD8+ T-cells decreases the avidity of the primary response using multiple techniques, 
showing that this phenotype is robust. 
To understand whether the function of IFN-γ on the avidity of the CD8+ T-cell response could 
originate from modulating the behavior of clones with different TCR affinity, we fixed the CD8+ T-cell 
clonotype by using the OVA-specific CD8+ T-cell clone OT-I, and varied the affinity of TCR priming. We 
transferred the smallest number of OT-I T-cells allowing reliable detection following priming with 
peptides exhibiting low-affinity for the OT-I TCR. WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I were co-transferred in mice 
that were subsequently challenged with LM expressing either the high-affinity OVA peptide N4 or 
altered peptides of lower affinity. We then compared the expansion of WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells 
upon priming. Expansion of IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells was increased following high-affinity (N4 peptide) 
priming at the peak of the response compared to WT. Surprisingly, priming with low-affinity peptides 
led to decreased frequency of IFN-γRKO over WT OT-I T-cells (Fig.2K, S2H), demonstrating that direct 
sensing of IFN-γ by CD8+ T-cells differentially affected T-cell expansion according to TCR affinity, 
favoring the participation of low-affinity T-cells while restraining the expansion of high-affinity T cells. 
This is consistent with our finding that IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-cells decreases the avidity of the 
primary response. 
Altogether, we concluded that IFN-γ signaling in CD8+ T-cells curtails expansion of T-cells with high 
affinity TCR, resulting in decreased avidity of the primary response. 
 
CD8+ T-cell paracrine IFN-γ signalling during priming regulates the avidity of the primary response. 
IFN-γ production during LM-OVA infection is characterized by an early wave of IFN-γ production 
occurring during priming and a second wave during the peak of the effector response (Krummel et al. 
2018). To determine when IFN-γ was sensed by CD8+ T-cells to regulate T-cell avidity, anti-IFN-γ was 
administered either 16-24h or at day 5 and 6 post-infection. Similar to deleting IFN-γR on CD8+ T-cells, 
blocking IFN-γ 16-24h post-infection resulted in increased abundance of OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells 
(Fig.3A) and increased tetramer (but not CD3) staining (Fig.3B-C). Taken together, we concluded that 
IFN-γ was sensed 16-24h post-infection to regulate the expansion and avidity of OVA-specific CD8+ T-
cells. Blocking IFN-γ during the second wave had no effect on those measures. 
Because NK cells were the main source of IFN-γ at the onset of LM infection (Fig.S3), we 
investigated whether they contributed to the regulation of T-cell avidity. To do so, we ablated NK cells 
with depleting NK1.1 antibody (Fig.3D) and infected mice with LM-OVA. The proportion and avidity of 
the T-cell response against OVA was assessed at the peak of the response. Depleting NK cells resulted 
  5 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
in an increase in the proportion of tetramer+ T-cells (Fig.3E), most likely due to the increased bacterial 
load, as mice without NK cells fail to control LM infection (Viegas et al. 2013). However, this was not 
accompanied by an increase in tetramer staining (Fig.3F), demonstrating that NK cells were not the 
source of IFN-γ implicated in the regulation of T-cell avidity. 
Because IFN-γ is shared between CD8+ T-cells during priming (Krummel et al. 2018) and the second 
cellular source of IFN-γ (Fig.S3), we hypothesized that CD8+ T-cell-derived IFN-γ may be the dominant 
source regulating CD8+ T-cell avidity. To test this, we created mixed bone marrow (BM) chimeras by 
reconstituting lethally irradiated IFN-γKO mice with ad-mixed IFN-γKO and CD8aKO BM, resulting in IFN-
γ deletion specifically in CD8+ T-cells (CD8-IFN-γKO mice). Reconstitution of IFN-γKO mice with ad-mixed 
IFN-γKO and WT BM was used to generate control (WT) mice (Fig.3G). STAT1 phosphorylation in CD8+ 
T-cells was analyzed 24h post-LM-OVA infection, as a read-out of IFN-γ signaling. WT CD8+ T-cells 
exhibited enhanced IFN-γ signaling compared to CD8-IFN-γKO cells (Fig.3H). Ablation of CD8-induced 
IFN-γ led to 40% inhibition of IFN-γ signaling (Fig.3H) while CD8+ T-cells constitute a small proportion 
of IFN-γ-producing cells (around 15%, Fig.S3), suggesting that CD8+ T-cells are highly sensitive to their 
own IFN-γ. At the peak of the response, we observed an increase in the proportion of OVA-specific T-
cells (Fig.3I) in CD8-IFN-γKO mice, with enhanced tetramer binding (Fig.3J), as observed with CD8-IFN-
γRKO mice (Fig.2C).  
Taken together, we concluded that CD8+ T-cell paracrine IFN-γ signaling regulates the avidity of 
their response.  
 
IFN-γ is provided by Virtual Memory T (T ) cells during priming. 
VM
Given  that  CD8+  T-cells  primarily  sense  their  own  IFN-γ  to  regulate  their  avidity,  we  then 
characterized which CD8+ T-cell subset secreted IFN-γ using scRNA-seq of CD8+ T-cells from control 
mice and mice infected with LM-OVA for 24h. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering identified 6 clusters 
(Fig.S4A), which were labelled based on known markers of naïve and memory T-cells (Fig.S4B). We 
distinguished 4 clusters harboring a naïve phenotype that we merged (Fig.4A-B), and 2 clusters with a 
memory phenotype (Cd44, Eomes and Cxcr3). One memory cluster had features of naïve cells, such as 
Lef1, Ccr7 and Sell (encoding for CD62L) expression, expressed high levels of Il2rb and low levels of the 
integrin Itga4 (Fig.4A-B). These markers are characteristic of Virtual Memory T-cells (T ), a subset of 
VM
antigen-independent memory T-cells (Hussain and Quinn 2019). The T  characteristic expression 
VM
pattern was confirmed by Differential Gene Expression analysis (Fig.4C). Analysis of IFN-γ transcript 
revealed  that  T   cells  were  the  predominant  subpopulation  producing  IFN-γ  (Fig.4D-E).  We 
VM
confirmed this by flow cytometry using GREAT mice, an IFN-γ reporter strain whereby YFP expression 
is driven by the IFN-γ promoter  (Reinhardt, Liang, and Locksley 2009). GREAT mice were infected with 
LM-OVA and the production of IFN-γ by the different CD8+ T-cell subsets was assessed using CD44, 
CD122 and CD49d (Itga4) to delineate naïve, T  and antigen-experienced memory CD8+ T-cells. Up 
VM
to 70% of IFN-γ producers were T  (Fig.4F) 24h after LM-OVA infection. Similar data was observed 
VM
with LM expressing gp33, ruling out the possibility of antigenic bias (Fig.4F). We concluded that T  
VM
was the main CD8+ T-cell subset producing IFN-γ during priming. 
T   cells  are  known  to  exhibit  enhanced  sensitivity  to  inflammatory  cytokines,  resulting  in 
VM
bystander activation (White et al. 2016). Differential pathway analysis, however, suggested that T  
VM
priming was more complex than bystander priming during LM-OVA infection. While true (antigen-
experienced) memory T-cells displayed signatures of cytokine priming, T  exhibited additional 
VM
signatures, some shared with naïve T-cells, including increased metabolism, heat-shock response, and 
cell cycle, which could indicate TCR priming (Fig.S4C). To address whether IFN-γ production by T  
VM
required TCR priming, CD8+ T-cells from GREAT mice were activated in vitro with anti-CD3ε/-CD28 
(“TCR stimulation”) and/or inflammatory cytokines, and IFN-γ expression was assessed after 24h. 
While IL-12 and IL-18 treatment induced some level of IFN-γ production, adding TCR priming 
synergized with IL-12/18 (Fig.4G). IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15, which share the same γ-chain receptor, further 
synergized with TCR and IL-12/18 stimulation to increase IFN-γ (Fig.4H). Other known inducers of IFN-
γ production did not lead to IFN-γ production by CD8+ T-cells (Fig.S4D). This suggests that maximum 
  6 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
IFN-γ production by T  required TCR priming. We validated this in vivo. We crossed GREAT mice with 
VM
OT-I mice to generate GREAT OT-I T-cells, which were transferred in WT recipients. Mice were then 
infected with either LM-OVA or LM-gp33. For this, we increased the frequency of OT-I cells transferred 
in order to detect OT-I T . IFN-γ expression by T  OT-I T-cells was observed upon infection with LM-
VM VM
OVA but not LM-gp33 (Fig.4I), confirming the requirement of TCR priming for early IFN-γ induction in 
vivo. In addition, we confirmed that IFN-γ production by CD8+ T-cells required TCR priming in vivo by 
using Nur77-reporter mice, for which GFP expression is controlled by the Nur77 promoter and 
correlates with TCR priming (Moran et al. 2011). Mice were infected with LM-OVA and after 24h, we 
observed a significant shift in GFP expression in IFN-γ+ CD8+ T-cells compared to non-producers 
(Fig.S4E). Finally, blocking MHC class-I 24 hours post-infection also significantly decreased IFN-γ 
expression by CD8+ T-cells (Fig.4J).  
Given the propensity of T  to produce IFN-γ during priming, and the role of IFN-γ in decreasing 
VM
the avidity of the primary response leading to sub-optimal immunity, we investigated whether the 
presence of T  correlated with disease severity in humans. To do this, we made use of the COMBAT 
VM
dataset, a blood atlas delineating innate and adaptive immune dysregulation in COVID-19 (Ahern et 
al. 2022). In humans, T  corresponds to a subset of CD8+ T effector memory RA (T ) cells that 
VM EMRA
expresses multiple killer Ig-like receptors (KIRs) and NKG2A/E (Thiele et al. 2020). We therefore 
focused on the T clusters (Fig.4K) to identify T . Differentially expressed genes revealed that 
EMRA  VM
clusters 2, 3, 5 and 6 are characterized by multiple KIR and NKG2 expression (Dataset 1) and were 
therefore labelled as T (Fig.4L). Analysis of the relationship between T  and disease severity 
VM  VM
revealed that enhanced frequency of T  is associated with severe COVID disease (Fig.4M). This is in 
VM
agreement with our finding that CD8+ T-cells mainly sense IFN-γ produced by T , leading to decreased 
VM
avidity of the primary response and a subsequently curtailed response during infection. 
Altogether, our data demonstrate that paracrine IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cell decreases the avidity 
of the primary response. Because T  is the subset producing IFN-γ during priming, we concluded that 
VM
T  cells regulate the avidity of the CD8+ T-cell response. 
VM
 
IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-cells does not regulate CD8+ T-cell differentiation and TCR diversity. 
Our data so far demonstrate that IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells during priming lowers the avidity of 
the effector response, thereby limiting T-cell responses against intracellular pathogens. However, it 
was  unclear  whether  IFN-γ  intrinsically  affected  T-cell  differentiation  and  fitness,  or  rather 
coordinated affinity, expansion, and differentiation. To address this question, we performed single-
cell RNA- and TCR-sequencing on OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells from CD8-IFN-γRKO and WT mice 9 days 
post-infection with LM-OVA. Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering, we identified 7 clusters 
(Fig.S5A), which we manually labelled based on known markers of effector and memory subsets 
(Fig.S5B). We distinguished 2 memory subsets based on Cx3cr1 expression, Cx3cr1neg being the least 
differentiated (Gerlach et al. 2016), one effector population and one highly cycling cluster (Fig.5A-B). 
WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO clusters had similar gene expression profiles, showing that IFN-γ does not affect 
intrinsic effector or memory potential (Fig.5C). This agrees with the fact that WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO T-
cells exhibited similar cytotoxicity (Fig1E-G). We also observed that the IFN-γ signature of WT-cells at 
the peak of infection was low and not decreased by IFN-γR deletion (Fig.S5C), consistent with our 
finding that CD8+ T-cells sense IFN-γ during priming rather than during the effector stage.  
We then tested whether IFN-γ sensing would alter the differentiation of endogenous CD8+ T-cells. 
We did not detect any significant differences by flow cytometry (Fig.5D-E), where the proportion of 
SLECs (KLRGIhiCD127lo) (Fig.5D) and MPECs (KLRGIloCD127hi) (Fig.5E) was identical between CD8-IFN-
γRKO and WT endogenous OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells at the peak of the response. It demonstrated that 
IFN-γ sensing does not regulate overall CD8+ T-cell differentiation. It was however worth noting that 
blocking overall IFN-γ during priming increased SLEC proportion (Fig.S5D) and conversely decreased 
MPEC proportion (Fig.S5E), which might be explained by the function of IFN-γ on other cell types, 
indirectly affecting CD8+ T-cell differentiation. For example, in models of vaccination, IFN-γ signaling 
in CD11b+ cells regulates CD62L expression on CD8+ T-cells (Sercan et al. 2010).  
  7 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
We then investigated whether the difference in avidity between WT and CD8-IFN-γRKO T-cells was 
related to the use of a different TCR repertoire. Analysis of TCR usage showed that the OVA-specific 
T-cell repertoire following LM-OVA infection is unique for each mouse, regardless of the genotype 
(Fig.S5F), suggesting that TCR repertoires emerging after infection are qualitatively different, as 
observed during CMV infection (Schober et al. 2020). The increased avidity induced by IFN-γR deletion 
may be the result of the expansion and dominance of a few high-affinity T-cell clones, which would 
result in decreased TCR diversity. However, IFN-γ sensing by T-cells did not regulate TCR diversity 
(Fig.5F), indicating that differences in avidity are not solely due to an alternate priming of high-affinity 
T-cells. To get more insight into the function of IFN-γ on the relationship between clonal breadth and 
differentiation, we compared the TCR clonal overlap between the different subsets. The overlap 
between SLECs and the memory populations was limited, about 20%, and was not affected by IFN-γR 
deletion (Fig.S5G). Interestingly, analysis of the overlap between the cycling population and the other 
subsets revealed that inhibition of IFN-γ sensing enhanced the overlap between cycling and SLEC 
populations (Fig.5G), suggesting that the expansion of distinct clones was enhanced following IFN-γR 
deletion. Given our previous data demonstrating that high-affinity T-cells expanded more following 
IFN-γR deletion, we hypothesize that those clones were of high-affinity for their cognate peptide. This, 
however, was not enough to reduce TCR diversity, indicating that lower affinity T-cells were still 
efficiently primed and recruited. Similar results were obtained when we focused our analysis on the 
four most expanded TCRV  chains (Fig.S5H-I).  
β
We concluded that IFN-γ sensing does not affect T-cell differentiation per se and TCR diversity, but 
combined analysis of scRNA- and scTCR-seq suggests that IFN-γ sensing regulates the relationship 
between clonal expansion and T-cell subsets. 
 
IFN-γ-sensing by CD8+ T-cells increases the avidity of the memory response. 
Because low- and high-affinity T-cells are known to have distinct differentiation skewing (Knudson 
et al. 2013) and IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells lowers the avidity of the primary response, we 
hypothesized  that  IFN-γ  may  rather  regulate  the  relationship  between  T-cell  avidity  and 
differentiation. To investigate this relationship, we first analyzed the differentiation state of adoptively 
transferred WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells upon infection with LM expressing altered OVA peptides. IFN-
γR deletion had limited effect on the differentiation of high-affinity T-cells, whereas it increased MPEC 
skewing of low-affinity T-cells (Fig.6A-B). This suggested that IFN-γR deletion enhanced memory 
formation of low-affinity T-cells. To test this, a small number of WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells were ad-
mixed, and transferred in WT mice, which were challenged with LM expressing altered OVA peptides 
with varying affinities. After 60 days, mice were re-challenged with LM-OVA in order to analyze OTI 
expansion. Priming with high-affinity peptides led to a slight decreased frequency of IFN-γRKO over WT 
OT-I T-cells during recall responses, as already suggested (Krummel et al. 2018). However, expansion 
of IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells primed with low-affinity peptides was increased compared to WT during recall 
responses (Fig.6C). This suggested that IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells increased the avidity of the 
memory response by limiting the inherent skewing in memory differentiation of low-affinity T-cells.  
To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the avidity of OVA-specific SLEC and MPEC CD8+ T-cells at 
the peak of the response. As expected, CD8-IFN-γRKO SLECs were skewed towards higher tetramer 
binding compared with WT (Fig.6D-E). However, CD8-IFN-γRKO MPECs displayed overall highly variable 
avidity at this time point (Fig. 6D-F). To specifically address whether IFN-γ affected the avidity of the 
memory response, LM-OVA infected CD8-IFN-γRKO and WT mice were re-challenged after 60 days, and 
the expanded memory T-cell population was analyzed. CD8-IFN-γRKO T-cells exhibited lower tetramer 
binding (Fig.6G), indicating that the memory compartment was skewed towards lower avidity in CD8-
IFN-γRKO mice. Similar results were observed following Influenza infection. We challenged WT and 
CD8-IFN-γRKO mice with the Influenza strain X31-OVA. After 60 days, mice were re-challenged with 
another virus strain, PR8-OVA. This strategy was used because X31 and PR8 express the same NP  T-
68
cell epitope but different B-cell epitopes, ensuring the virus was not cleared by memory B-cells. 
Endogenous OVA-specific T-cells were indeed of lower avidity (Fig.6H) in the lung, but we could detect 
  8 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
very few of those cells. We therefore also analyzed the avidity of the T-cell repertoire towards the 
dominant flu antigen NP . Both in draining lymph nodes and in the lung, NP + CD8+ T-cells expanded 
68 68
less (Fig.6I-J) and were of lower avidity (Fig.6K-L) in CD8-IFN-γRKO mice compared to WT mice. 
Altogether, we concluded that IFN-γ improves memory responses. 
 
Overall, our data demonstrate that IFN-γ sensing by CD8+ T-cells results in decreased avidity of the 
primary response, leading to sub-optimum control of infection. This is accompanied by increased 
avidity of the secondary response. T  are the main subset providing IFN-γ to other T-cells, linking 
VM
innate signals to the regulation of CD8+ T-cell breadth, ensuring that the effector and memory pools 
are composed of a breadth of T-cell clones. 
 
   
  9 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Discussion 
In this study, we described a critical role of IFN-γ as a paracrine modulator of CD8+ T-cell responses 
by coordinating T-cell expansion, differentiation, and avidity. Individual CD8+ T-cell clones exhibit a 
remarkable degree of functional and phenotypic plasticity, a prerequisite for effective adaptive 
responses (Kaech and Cui 2012; Buchholz, Schumacher, and Busch 2016; Rutishauser and Kaech 2010). 
However,  such  malleability  necessitates  regulatory  mechanisms  ensuring  robustness  at  the 
population-wide level. Our data demonstrate that IFN-γ mediates such regulatory mechanisms, not 
only during infection but also during anti-tumor immunity (Mazet et al. 2023).  
Regulating the avidity of the T-cell response is critical. Increased avidity in the same order of 
magnitude we observed for IFN-γR deletion has been correlated with resistance to viral infection in 
humans. Increased control of HIV-1 replication by CD8+ T-cells (Almeida et al. 2007) is correlated with 
increased avidity, and, consequently, HIV controllers display higher functional avidities of Gag-specific 
and HLA-B-restricted responses than non-controllers (Berger et al. 2011). Similar increased avidity has 
been observed in patients that cleared Hepatitis C compared to chronically infected patients (Yerly et 
al. 2008). This emphasizes the importance of understanding the mechanisms regulating the avidity of 
the T-cell response. 
High-affinity T-cells have a competitive advantage over low-affinity T-cells, with ligand affinity 
determining  the  frequency  of  responding  cells  (Richard  et  al.  2018).  Low-affinity  T-cells  are 
nevertheless efficiently recruited during an immune response (Zehn, Lee, and Bevan 2009), resulting 
in a physiological range of affinities of around 100-fold (Hebeisen et al. 2013; Dolton et al. 2018). Our 
data demonstrate that this is in part due to IFN-γ, improving low-avidity T-cell expansion and thereby 
lowering the threshold for low-affinity T-cells to enter the effector response, overcoming the selective 
advantage of high-affinity T-cells. Multiple hypotheses could explain the importance of recruiting 
lower-affinity T-cells during primary responses. During infection, too many high-avidity T-cells may 
drive  immunopathology  (Hillaire,  Rimmelzwaan,  and  Kreijtz  2013).  In  addition,  they  become 
dysfunctional and exhausted in chronic conditions (Shakiba et al. 2021). Interestingly, in metastatic 
melanoma patients, PD-1neg T-cell clones naturally present within an endogenous repertoire exhibit 
lower avidity TCRs than PD-1+ T-cell clones, exemplifying the tight relationship between T-cell avidity 
and exhaustion (Simon et al. 2016).  
Lowering the avidity of the primary response may also be necessary to increase the avidity of the 
secondary response by allowing high-affinity T-cell clones, which are inherently biased to becoming 
effector, to also enter the memory pool, as shown here. While low-avidity T-cells are intrinsically 
skewed to become memory T-cells (Knudson et al. 2013) where they are important for memory 
responses towards mutated pathogens (van Gisbergen et al. 2011; Kavazović et al. 2020), IFN-γ 
ensures that high-avidity T-cells are also part of the memory pool, enabling efficient memory response 
towards both mutated and native pathogen. 
Mechanistically, we found that IFN-γ is provided by T  to other CD8 T-cells during priming, serving 
VM
as “Signal 3”. But how IFN-γ signaling coordinate the selection of high- versus low-affinity T-cells 
throughout the effector and memory pool is unclear. IFN-γ induces the expression of transcription 
factors known to regulate the threshold of T-cell activation, proliferation, and differentiation, such as 
c-Myc and T-bet (Gocher, Workman, and Vignali 2021; Richer, Nolz, and Harty 2013). Alternately, IFN-
γ induces ICAM-1 expression, which has been shown to regulate memory formation (Gérard et al. 
2013; Cox et al. 2013). Regulation of ICAM-1 expression in CD8+ T-cells could alter the nature of T-T 
communication and associated quorum sensing (Zenke et al. 2020). It is tempting to speculate that 
those factors may integrate with TCR signaling, but more studies are necessary to elucidate the 
mechanisms enabling this coordination. 
 
Taken together, our work provides evidence that IFN-γ serve an important autoregulatory role by 
coordinating CD8+ T-cell avidity and differentiation, decreasing the avidity of the primary response 
while increasing the avidity of the memory response, ensuring a balanced control of short- and long-
term immunity. 
  10 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Methods 
Mice  
CD8a-CreGFP (JAX stock no.: 008766), IFN-γRflox/flox (JAX stock no.: 025394), IFN-γ-GREAT-YFP (JAX 
stock no.: 017580), IFN-γKO (JAX stock no.: 002287), Nur77-GFP (JAX stock no.: 018974), CD8aKO (JAX 
stock no.: 002665) and OT-I (JAX stock no.: 003831) were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. 
C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Charles River, UK (JAX stock number: 000664). To generate CD8 
IFN-γRKO mice CD8a-CreGFP mice were crossed with IFN-γRflox/flox mice, which were subsequently 
crossed to Rosa26-tdTomato mice (kind gift from the group of Tal Arnon). All experiments involving 
mice were conducted in agreement with the United Kingdom Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act of 
1986 and performed in accordance to approved experimental procedures by the Home Office and the 
Local Ethics Reviews Committee (University of Oxford). 
Cell Isolation 
Spleens were harvested from mice at indicated time points, mashed in 1x PBS and filtered through 
70 μM filter. Splenocytes were resuspended in red lysis buffer (155 mM NH4Cl, 12 mM NaHCO3 and 
0.1 mM EDTA in ddH O) and incubated on ice for 5 minutes, before being washed in PBS twice.  
2
For T-cell isolation, WT or OT-I CD8+ T-cells were isolated through negative separation from lymph 
nodes and spleens of 6- to 12-week-old WT or OT-I mice, using the MojoSortTM CD8+ T-cell isolation 
kit and magnets (Biolegend, #480008 and #480019). Isolated T-cells were resuspended in complete 
RPMI (RPMI 1640 [Gibco, #21870-076] supplemented with 2% FCS and 100x Penicillin-Streptomycin 
[Gibco, #10378-016]). 
Infection and Treatments 
Mice were given an intravenous (i.v.) injection of 20*103 colony-forming units (cfu) of LM 
expressing either a secreted form of OVA (LM-OVA) or one of the LM following strains expressing the 
indicated peptides (LM-N4, LM-T4, LM-Q4H7, LM-V4, LM-G4 or LM-gp33). LM strains were provided 
by Dietmar Zehn (TU Munich) expect LM-gp33, which was purchased from Nanjing Sungyee Biotech. 
Frozen down LM aliquots were expanded in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) broth (Sigma, #53286-100G) 
and LM suspensions were plated on BHI agar plates (Sigma, #70138-500G). LM (200.000 cfu for 24h 
experiments; 20.000 cfu for d7-10 experiments) was injected intravenously when they were in 
exponential phase of growth. For memory responses, mice were rechallenged at least 60 days after 
the primary infection with 200.000 cfu. 
In some experiments, OT-I T-cells (2-3x106 cells or 50.000 cells for 24h or d7-10 experiments, 
respectively) were transferred into mice recipient by intravenous injection the days before infection.  
In some experiments, mice received a single intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection 16-24 hours post 
infection of 75 μg of isotype matched control antibody (rat IgG1, BioXCell, #BE0088) or anti-Interferon-
gamma (BioXCell, clone: XMG1.2). In some experiments 50 ug of isotype matched control antibody 
(rat IgG2a, BioXCell, #BE0089) or anti-NK1.1 (BioXCell, clone: PK136) was injected intraperitoneally 
two days and one day prior to infection, as well as on day 4 and 6 post-infection. 
For subsequent staining of intracellular cytokines, mice were injected i.p. with 250 μg BFA 6 hours 
before being killed. 
For primary infection with Influenza virus, mice weighing >20g were anaesthetized using isoflurane 
and intranasally administered with 4x104 or 4x105 PFU of X31-OVA influenza A virus in PBS. Mice were 
weighted for 14d following infection. For memory responses, mice were rechallenged at least 60 days 
after the primary infection with 106 PR8-OVA. 
In vitro Activation and Treatment 
For in vitro re-stimulation experiments, splenocytes were activated 7-10 days after infection with 
different concentrations of N4 peptide or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (2 ng/mL) and 
ionomycin (20 ng/mL).  
  11 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
For in vitro stimulation experiments, naïve T-cells were seeded in 96-well U-bottom together with 
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) loaded with the indicated OVA peptide (Proteogenix) at 
10 ng/mL or antibodies. For experimental conditions including TCR stimulation, wells were pre-coated 
with anti- CD3ε (Biolegend, #145-2C11) prepared in PBS at 1 μg/mL for 2-3 hours at 37°C before being 
emptied for seeding. For ICAM-1 stimulation, wells were pre-coated with 5 μg/mL ICAM-1 (Biolegend, 
#553006) for 2-3 hours at 37°C before being emptied for seeding. Following coating with anti-CD3ε 
and/or  ICAM-1,  cytokine  preparations  were  added  to  the  wells  according  to  the  specified 
experimental conditions, which included different combinations of IL-12 (Biolegend, #577004), IL-18 
(Biolegend, #767004), IL-15 (Biolegend, #566302), TNF (PeproTech, #315-01A-20uG), IL-33 (Biolegend, 
#580504), IFN-α (Biolegend, #752804), IFN-β (Biolegend, #581304), IL-2 (Biolegend, #575404), IL-1β 
(Biolegend,  #575102),  and  IL-7  (PreproTech,  #217-17).  For  co-stimulation,  1  μg/mL  anti-CD28 
(Biolegend, #37.51) was also added to wells pre-coated with anti-CD3ε. The cells were incubated 
overnight under the specified conditions at 37°C in 5% CO  before being subjected to staining and flow 
2
cytometry analysis. 
For subsequent staining of intracellular cytokines, cultured cells were treated with 7 μg/mL 
brefeldin A (BFA, ChemCruz, #sc-200861A) 30 minutes post-stimulation and incubated for 4.5 hours 
at 37°C in 5% CO2 before further processing. 
Generation of BM chimeras 
IFN-γKO Recipient mice were irradiated with 4.25 Gy per cycle for two irradiation cycles, 4 hours 
apart. Bone marrow from IFN-γKO, CD8aKO or C57BL/6J mice were prepared from femur and tibia. Cell 
suspension was filtered through a 40 μM strainer shortly prior to intravenous injection of 100 μL 
(equivalent to 1.25 x105 cells/mouse). Mice were kept for two weeks post-transplantation on 
antibiotics (Enroflocaxin) in drinking water to avoid infection. 
In Vivo Cytotoxicity Assay 
Isolated and washed splenocytes were resuspended in complete RPMI and divided into two 15 mL 
falcon tubes, each containing 1 mL splenocyte suspension. OVA peptide SIINFEKL (N4) was added to 
one splenocyte suspension to a final concentration of 10 μg/mL. Both the peptide-treated and 
untreated splenocytes were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes and shaken half-way. The cells in both 
tubes were counted and resuspended to obtain 1 mL suspensions containing 10*106 cells. Peptide-
loaded and non-loaded cell suspensions were incubated with 1 μM eFluor 670 and 2 μM CFSE in 1x 
PBS, respectively. The dye-stained cell suspensions were centrifuged and resuspended in 1x PBS, 
before being mixed at a 1:1 ratio for injection into LM-OVA-infected recipient mice, as well as a naïve 
mouse used as control. Splenocytes were isolated from the spleens of infected and naïve mice 24h 
following injection, and cytotoxic killing by OVA-specific CD8+ T-cells was assessed through flow 
cytometry analysis. The degree of cytotoxicity is given as the percentage of targeT-cell lysis relative to 
the naive mouse, calculated by the following formula: 100-100*(R /Rn ), where the R values are 
infected aïve
equal to the % peptide-loaded population/% non-loaded population ratios in the infected and naive 
mice. 
Flow Cytometry 
Single-cell suspensions obtained from spleen or cultured CD8+ T-cells were stained in V-bottom 96-
well plates in flow cytometry buffer (2% FCS, 2 mM EDTA, and 0.02% sodium azide in 1x PBS). Live 
dead staining and surface staining was performed using Zombie NIR Fixable Viability Kit (Biolegend, 
#423106/423105), TruStain FcXTM (anti-mouse CD16/32, Biolegend, #101319) and fluorochrome-
conjugated primary antibodies (Biolegend, Cell Signaling Technology or BD Biosciences), respectively. 
For experiments that included tetramer staining, cells were incubated with either Alexa Fluor 647- or 
BV421-conjugated, N4-specific MHC I tetramers (obtained from the National Institutes of Health 
Tetramer Core Facility [Emory University, Atlanta]) diluted 1:500 in flow cytometry buffer for 30 
minutes at room temperature, prior to surface staining. If not otherwise indicated, all cells were fixed 
either in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 minutes at room temperature or using eBioscienceTM 
  12 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Set (Invitrogen, #00-5523-00) for 30 minutes at 4°C. Intracellular 
transcription factor staining was performed after fixation and permeabilization using fluorescently 
labelled primary antibodies. Intracellular cytokine staining was performed after 15 minutes fixation 
using  BD  Cytofix/CytopermTM  Fixation/Permeabilization  Kit  (BD  Biosciences,  #554714).  Flow 
cytometry data were recorded on BD LSRII or FortessaX20 using DIVA software and analyzed using 
FlowJoTM software (Tree Star).  
Surface markers used for flow cytometry analysis included: anti-CD8 (Biolegend, clone: 53-6.7), 
anti-CD4 (Biolegend, clone: RM4-5), anti-CD69 (Biolegend, clone: H1.2F3), anti-CD44 (Biolegend, 
clone: IM7), anti-CD49d (Biolegend, clone: R1-2), anti-NK1.1 (Biolegend, clone: PK137), anti-KLRGI 
(Biolegend, clone: 2F1/KLRF1). Antibodies used for intracellular cytokine staining included anti-IFN-
gamma (Biolegend, clone: XMG1.2) and anti-TNF (Biolegend, clone: MP6-XT22). 
Cell binding avidity assays 
For acoustic force spectroscopy of T cell avidity using the Z-Movi cell avidity analyser (LUMICKS, 
The Netherlands), microfluidic chips were functionalised with 1M NaOH followed coating with poly-L-
lysine (Sigma Aldrich). Chips were kept dry in a 37oC incubator, with repeated aspiration of any residual 
liquid. For target cell monolayer seeding, microfluidic chips were rehydrated with prewarmed media. 
B16 tumour cells expressing OVA (70 – 80% confluency) were then seeded at a density of 100 million 
cells/mL and frequent checking under the microscope to ensure no bubble formation and appropriate 
seeding density. Cells were incubated for 3h at 37oC, with fresh change of media in between. 
Experiments were performed with sorted tetramerpos cells isolated from 4 WT and 4 CD8-IFN-γRKO 
mice 9 days after LM-OVA infection on each chip. Sorted cells were cultured for 3 days prior to 
measuring  cell  avidity.  Effector  T  cells  were stained  with CellTrace  Far  Red  Proliferation  Kit 
(ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The labelled cells were then 
seeded at a density of 10 million cells/mL onto the microfluidic chip containing the target cell 
monolayer and incubated for 15 min prior to increasing force application to measure cellular avidity. 
The 2 different types of effector cells were evaluated on the same microfluid chip, and the order was 
randomised between chips on repeated runs. Image-based automated detection of T cell detachment 
was performed using the Oceon software (LUMICKS) and analysis was conducted according to 
manufacturer recommendations. 
Single-cell RNA sequencing 
For CD8+ T-cell sequencing during priming: CD8+ T-cells from 3 naïve mice and 3  mice infected with 
LM-OVA for 24h were sorted from splenocytes, cryopreserved in 20% FBS and 10% DMSO in RPMI and 
further  processed  by  Single  Cell  Discoveries,  Netherlands.  Samples  were  further  processed  in 
accordance with 10x Genomics single cell protocols. Single cell libraries were prepared using the 
Chromium 3ʹ v2 platform (10× Genomics, Pleasanton, CA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. In 
brief, single cells were encapsulated into gel beads in emulsions (GEMs) in the GemCode instrument 
followed by cell lysis and barcoded reverse transcription of RNA, amplification, shearing and 3ʹ adaptor 
and sample index attachment. Approximately, 5000 to 7000 cells were recovered. Libraries were 
sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq 6000. Read mapping, alignment to GRCm38 and quantitation of 
sample count matrices was performed with the 10x Genomics Cell Ranger pipeline (v 4.0.0).  
For CD8+ T-cell sequencing at the peak of the primary response: tetramerpos CD8+ T-cells from 4 WT 
and 4 CD8 IFN-γRKO mice infected with LM-OVA for 9 days were sorted from splenocytes. Each mouse 
from each genotype was labelled with TotalSeq™ Hashtags (Biolegend) and mixed. Approximately 
20,000 cells per sample were loaded onto the 10X Genomics Chromium Controller (Chip K). Gene 
expression, feature barcoding and TCR sequencing libraries were prepared using the 10x Genomics 
Single Cell 5' Reagent Kits v2 (Dual Index) following manufacturer user guide (CG000330 Rev B). The 
final libraries were diluted to ~10nM for storage. The 10nM library was denatured and further diluted 
prior to loading on the NovaSeq6000 sequencing platform (Illumina, v1.5 chemistry, 28bp/98bp paired 
end for gene expression and feature barcoding, 150bp paired end for TCR libraries). 
 
  13 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
scRNA-sequencing analysis. 
Datasets were analyzed using Seurat version 4.0.5 (Hao et al., 2021). For CD8+ T-cell sequencing 
during priming, we filtered out T-cells having less than 600 and more than 5,000 detected genes, cells 
in which mitochondrial protein-coding genes represented more than 10% of UMI. Cells were then 
further filtered based on the expression of Cd2, Cd8a and Cd8b1. Samples were then integrated with 
the IntegrateData function and normalized with the scTransform function of Seurat and variation 
associated  with  mitochondrial  and  ribosomal  UMI  percentage  were  regressed  out.  Principal 
components were calculated using the top 3,000 variable features. These genes were used as input 
for  principal  component  analysis  (PCA),  and  significant  PCs  (n  =  30)  identified  using  Seurat 
(“JackStraw” test and “Elbowplot”). Clustering was performed with the Louvain algorithm (n = 30 PCs, 
resolution = 0.3). 
For CD8+ T-cell sequencing at the peak of the primary response, we filtered out T-cells having less 
than 500 and more than 5,500 detected genes, cells in which mitochondrial protein-coding genes 
represented more than 5% of UMI and cells in which the percentage of largest genes was more than 
15% of UMI. Cells were then further filtered based on the expression of Cd2, Cd8a and Cd8b1. Samples 
were then integrated with the IntegrateData function and normalized with the scTransform function 
of Seurat and variation associated with mitochondrial UMI percentage were regressed out. Principal 
components were calculated using the top 3,000 variable features. These genes were used as input 
for  principal  component  analysis  (PCA),  and  significant  PCs  (n  =  20)  identified  using  Seurat 
(“JackStraw” test and “Elbowplot”). Clustering was performed with the Louvain algorithm (n = 20 PCs, 
resolution = 0.3). A large cluster corresponding to a contamination with naïve CD8 T cells was removed 
and dataset was re-normalized, scaled and PCA and UMAP were re-calculated.  
For differential expression analysis, NormalizeData and ScaleData were run on the RNA assay of 
the integrated data. Significant differentially expressed genes between clusters were identified using 
the “FindAllMarkers” function, Wilcoxon test and selecting markers expressed in at least 25% of cells. 
Significant differentially expressed genes between stimulation within clusters were identified using 
the “FindMarkers” function, Wilcoxon test and selecting markers expressed in at least 25% of cells. 
Pathway analysis was performed with Fast gene set enrichment analysis (fgsea), using the Gene 
Ontology or the Reactome pathway repositories. IFNg signature (Ifngr2, Stat1, Stat2, Irf1, Irf2, Irf7, 
Cxcl9, Cxcl10, Cxcl11) was computed using the package UCell (Andreatta and Carmona 2021). 
For  TCR  sequencing  analysis,  paired  chain  TCR  sequences  were  obtained  through  targeted 
amplification  of  full-length  V(D)J  segments  during  library  preparation.  Sequence  assembly  and 
clonotype calling was done through cellranger’s immune profiling pipeline (cellranger multi). TCR 
profiling  on  filtered  contig  annotations  was  done  using  R  package  scRepertoire  version  1.1.4 
(Borcherding, Bormann, and Kraus 2020). Only cells for which both TCRa and TCRb could be identified 
were used. Clone calling was done for each sample set independently before integration in the Seurat 
object. Diversity was done by calculating the Shannon Index for each mouse, using the function 
clonalDiversity in scRepertoire. 
Statistical Analysis 
One-way ANOVA was selected for pairwise comparisons across multiple experimental conditions 
and unpaired student’s t-tests were used to compare two conditions for statistical significance. EC  
50
between groups was calculated by fitting a 3-parameter fixed-slope Hill function and confirming good 
fit by the R square function and visual inspection before performing a F-test to compare the model 
parameters. Data were considered statistically significant when p < 0.05. Data are presented as mean 
± SEM or ± SD. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 7 software. Ns=non-
significant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.0002 and ****P < 0.0001. 
Data availability 
The mouse scRNAseq and scTCRseq data generated in this study will be deposited in the GEO 
database. Datasets reused in this study: EGAS00001005507. All data are included in the Supplemental 
  14 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Information or available from the authors upon reasonable requests, as are unique reagents used in 
this Article. 
 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Tal Arnon, Michael Dustin, Vivian W. C. Lau, Anne Chauveau and Mariana Borsa for 
critical reading of the manuscript. We thank the Lumicks team, in particular Brittany Wingham, for 
assistance with cell binding avidity experiments and JonathanWebber for assistance with cell sorting. 
We thank the NIH Tetramer facility for all the tetramers used in this study. This work was supported 
by the BBSRC (BB/R015651/1 to A.G), Cancer Research UK (CR-UK) (C5255/A18085 through the Cancer 
Research UK Oxford Centre and 29549 to A.G); the Kennedy Trust for Rheumatology Research 
(KENN151607 and KENN202112 to A.G), John Fell Funds (0006162 to A.G), MLSTF funds and Kennedy 
Trust Price Studentship (to L.F.K.U). 
 
Figure legends 
Figure 1: IFN-γR deletion in CD8+ T-cells improves effector responses against Influenza infection 
(A-B) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were infected with 4x104 pfu X31-OVA and weight 
was measured every two days to quantify relative weight loss. Graphs show average (A) and individual 
(B) weight loss. (C-D) CD8-IFN-γRKO and WT mice were infected with 105 pfu of X31-OVA. Graphs shows 
average weight (C) and survival (D) over time. (E-F) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were 
infected with LM-OVA and injected with differentially labelled mixtures of N4-loaded or unloaded 
target splenocytes at day 7 post-infection to quantify in vivo cytotoxicity. E- Dotplot example of 
antigen-specific in vivo cytotoxicity. F- Graph shows in vivo cytotoxicity normalized by the percentage 
of endogenous OVA-specific T-cells. G- CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were infected with LM-
OVA. Splenocytes were isolated between d7 and 10 and re-stimulated with N4 peptide. LAMP-1 
expression  in  CD8+  T-cells  was  analyzed  by  flow  cytometry  normalized  by  the  percentage  of 
endogenous OVA-specific T-cells. (H-J) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were infected with X31-
OVA and lungs were isolated 8 days post-infection to analyze the relative abundance (H), absolute 
numbers (I) and relative avidity (J) of tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells by flow cytometry. Data are pooled from 
3 (A-D, G, J, n = 11-13) or 4 (F, H-I, each dot represents an experiment) independent experiments. 
Error bars indicate the mean ± s.e.m (A, C) or median (F-I) or median ± s.d. (J). Relative avidity was 
calculated by dividing tetramer MFI by CD3 MFI. Cytotoxicity and LAMP-1 expression was normalized 
to the relative abundance of tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells within each sample. Comparison between groups 
was calculated using the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (A-F). *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; 
NS, not significant.  
Figure 2: IFN-γR deletion in CD8+ T-cells increases the avidity of effector T-cells 
 (A-H) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were infected with LM-OVA and splenocytes were 
isolated at the peak of the response (day 7-10). (A-C) Endogenous OVA-specific (tetramer+) CD8+ T-
cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Graphs show their relative abundance (A), representative 
tetramer histogram (B), normalized tetramer MFI (C). (D-H) Splenocytes were re-stimulated in vitro 
with the indicated concentrations of N4 for 16h. D- Percent of CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) CD8+ 
T-cells expressing IFN-γ at the maximum peptide concentration. IFN-γ expression was assessed by flow 
cytometry and normalized by % of tetramer+ cells. (E-H) Analysis of relative IFN-γ expression by flow 
cytometry (E) and ELISA (G) and quantification of EC  by flow cytometry (F) and ELISA (H). (I-J) CD8-
50
IFN-γRKO and WT mice were infected with LM-OVA and tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells were sorted 9 days post-
infection to measure TCR avidity after 2 days of culturing. (I) Analysis of CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT 
(grey) CD8+ T-cell binding to target cells during acoustic force measurement. (J) Quantification of CD8-
IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) CD8+ T-cell binding at maximum force. (K) WT mice were transferred with 
  15 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
50,000 ad-mixed WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells and infected with LM expressing the indicated OVA 
peptides. Spleens were isolated 9 days post-infection to analyze OT-I T-cells expansion by flow 
cytometry. Data are expressed as the ratio between IFN-γRKO and WT OT-I cell number. Data are 
pooled from 9 (A-D, each dot represents an experiment), 3 (E-H, each dot represents an experiment), 
2 (I-J, each dot represents an experiment) or 3 (K, n = 6) independent experiments. Error bars indicate 
the median (C-D, J-K) or mean ± s.e.m (E, G). Tetramer-binding gMFIs of CD8-IFN-γRKO samples were 
normalized to mean WT expression within each independent experiment. Comparison between 
groups was calculated using the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (A, C-D, F, H, J) or a Two-way 
ANOVA and Šidák’s multiple comparison test (K). *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; NS, not significant. 
Figure 3: IFN-γ-is by CD8+ T-cells at priming and is paracrine 
(A-C) WT mice were infected with LM-OVA and mice were either left untreated (grey) or treated with 
anti-IFN-γ 16-24 hours (red) or at day 5 and 6 (orange) post-infection. Splenocytes were isolated 9 
days post infection and analyzed by flow cytometry. Graphs show relative abundance (A), tetramer 
gMFIs (B), and CD3 gMFI (C) of tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells. (D-E) WT mice were treated with depleting 
NK1.1 antibodies (brown) or control antibodies (grey) and infected with LM-OVA. D- Splenocytes were 
isolated after 24h and the proportion of NK cells was quantified by flow cytometry. (E-F) Splenocytes 
were isolated after 9 days and tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Graphs show 
relative abundance (E) and tetramer gMFIs (F) of tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells.  (G-H) WT (blue) and CD8-
IFN-γKO (pink) chimera mice were infected with LM-OVA. G- Splenocytes were isolated after 24h and 
stimulated in vitro with PMA/Ionomycin. IFN-γ expression by NK and CD8+ T-cells was quantified by 
flow  cytometry.  H-  Graph  shows  the  percentage  of  IFN-γ-expressing  CD8+  T-cells  or  NK  cells. 
Splenocytes were isolated after 24h and STAT1 phosphorylation in activated (CD69+) CD8+ T-cells was 
analyzed by flow cytometry. (I-J) Splenocytes were isolated after 9 days and tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells 
were analyzed by flow cytometry. Graphs show relative abundance (I) and tetramer gMFIs (J) of 
tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells. Data are pooled from 3 (A-C, n = 6-12), 2 (D-F, n = 10), 4 (G-J, each dot 
represents an experiment) independent experiments. STAT1 phosphorylation was normalized to 
control (IFN-γKO) pSTAT1 MFI. Error bars indicate the median. Comparison between groups was 
calculated using the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (D-F, I-J) or a Two-way ANOVA and Šidák’s 
multiple comparison test (A-C, G-H). *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; NS, not significant.  
Figure 4: T  are the main CD8+ T-cell source of IFN-γ-during priming 
VM
 (A-F) CD8+ T-cells from naïve mice or mice infected with LM-OVA for 24h were sorted and subjected 
to  scRNA-seq  analysis  (n=3).  A-  Graph-based  clustering  (n=3224  ctrl;  n=3495  LM-OVA)  of  the 
assembled cell states. B- Heatmap shows the average expression of selected markers. C- Volcanoplot 
shows specific differentially regulated genes between T  and other CD8+ T-cells. Green dots: genes 
VM
with log2 (fold-change) value >0.5 or <-05; Blue dots: genes with an adjusted p value<0.05; Red dots: 
genes with log2 (fold-change) value >0.5 or <-05 and an adjusted p value<0.05. D- Graph shows the 
relative frequency of naïve, T  or memory T cells (TM) CD8+ T-cells within the IFN-γ+ CD8+ T-cell 
VM
fraction. E- Dot plot shows the average expression of IFN-γ in naïve, T  or TM cells at steady-state 
VM
and 24h post LM-OVA infection. F- GREAT mice were infected with either LM-OVA (red) or LM-gp33 
(blue) and CD8+ T-cell populations among IFN-γ (YFP)+ splenocytes were analyzed by flow cytometry 
24h after infection. (G-H) CD8+ T from GREAT mice were stimulated in vitro with anti-CD3/-28 (TCR), 
and the indicated cytokines. IFN-γ production was analyzed by flow cytometry after 24h. I- Mice were 
transferred with 2x106 GREAT OT-I CD8+ T-cells and infected with LM-OVA (red) or LM-gp33 (orange). 
IFN-γ (YFP) expression by OT-I was quantified by flow cytometry 24 hours post-infection. J- GREAT 
mice were infected with LM-OVA and treated with anti-MHC class-I, and anti-IL-12/-18 as indicated. 
IFN-γ (YFP) production was quantified in CD8+ T-cells 24h post-infection. (K-M) T  clusters from the 
EMRA
COMBAT human blood atlas were reanalyzed according to COVID-19 severity. K- Graph-based 
clustering of the T  clusters. L- Volcanoplot shows specific differentially regulated genes between 
EMRA
T  and other T . Green dots: genes with log2 (fold-change) value >0.5 or <-05; Blue dots: genes 
VM EMRA
with an adjusted p value<0.05; Red dots: genes with log2 (fold-change) value >0.5 or <-05 and an 
  16 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
adjusted p value<0.05. M- Violinplot shows the percentage of T  that are T  according to disease 
EMRA VM
state and severity. Each dot is a patient. Pairwise group comparisons with two-sided Wilcoxon signed-
rank test. Data are pooled from 3 (F-H, n = 6-12) or 4 (I-J, each dot represents an experiments) 
independent experiments. Error bars indicate the median (F, I-J) or mean ± s.e.m (G-H). *P<0.05; 
**P<0.01; ***P<0.001; NS, not significant. 
Figure 5: IFN-γR deletion in CD8+ T-cells does not regulate overall differentiation and TCR diversity. 
(A-C, F-G) CD8-IFN-γRKO and WT mice were infected with LM-OVA, tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells were sorted 
from spleens 9 days post infection and subjected to scRNA-seq and scTCR-seq analysis (n=4). A- Graph-
based clustering (n=5646 WT; n=4837 CD8-IFN-γRKO) of the assembled differentiation states. B- 
ViolinPlot shows the expression of selected markers. C- Plot shows the average gene expression of WT 
and  CD8-IFN-γRKO  clusters.  (D-E)  CD8-IFN-γRKO  and  WT  mice  were  infected  with  LM-OVA  and 
splenocytes were isolated 9 days post-infection to analyze the relative abundance of SLEC (D) and 
MPEC (E) cells by flow cytometry. (F) Relative TCR clonal diversity (Shannon index) by cell state and 
genotype extracted from scTCR-seq analysis. (G) Clonal overlap between the cycling cluster and the 
other clusters from scTCR-seq analysis. Data are pooled from 9 (D-E, n = 27) independent experiments. 
Error bars indicate the median. Comparison between groups was calculated using the two-tailed 
unpaired Student’s t-test. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; NS, not significant.  
Figure 6: IFN-γR deletion in CD8+ T-cells lowers the avidity of CD8+ T-cell memory responses. 
(A-C) WT mice were transferred with 50,000 ad-mixed WT and IFN-γRKO OT-I T-cells and infected with 
LM expressing the indicated OVA peptides. Spleens were isolated 9 days post-infection to analyze the 
relative abundance of SLEC (A) and MPEC (B) within the transferred OT-I population by flow 
cytometry. C- Mice were re-challenged after at least 60 days with LM-OVA and spleens were isolated 
5 days after rechallenge to analyze OT-I T-cells expansion by flow cytometry. Data are expressed as 
the ratio between IFN-γRKO and WT OT-I cell number. (D-G) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice 
were infected with LM-OVA. (D-E) Splenocytes were isolated after 9 days and analyzed by flow 
cytometry. D- Representative histograms of tetramer staining within the SLEC and MPEC populations. 
(E-F) Normalized tetramer-staining of SLEC (E) and MPEC (F). G- Mice were re-challenged 60 days post-
infection with LM-OVA and normalized tetramer gMFI was analyzed by flow cytometry after 5 days. 
(H-L) CD8-IFN-γRKO (red) and WT (grey) mice were infected with X31-OVA. Mice were re-challenged 
60 days post-infection with PR8-OVA. Tissues were harvested after 5 days and stained for CD8 T-cells 
and the indicated tetramer. H- Graph shows normalized N4-tetramer gMFI. (I-J) Graphs show the 
percentage of NP68 tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells in the LN (I) and lung (J). (K-L) Graphs show normalized 
NP  tetramer gMFI in the LN (K) and lung (L). Data are pooled from 3 (A-C, n = 6), 7 (E-F, each dot 
68
represents an experiment) or 5 (G, each dot represents an experiment) independent experiments. 
Tetramer-binding gMFIs of CD8-IFN-γRKO samples were normalized to mean WT expression within 
each independent experiment. Error bars indicate the median. Comparison between groups was 
calculated using the two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001; NS, not 
significant.  
References 
Ahern, David J., Zhichao Ai, Mark Ainsworth, Chris Allan, Alice Allcock, Brian Angus, M. Azim Ansari, et 
al. 2022. “A Blood Atlas of COVID-19 Defines Hallmarks of Disease Severity and Specificity.” Cell 
185 (5): 916-938.e58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.012. 
Alexander-Miller, Martha A. 2005. “High-Avidity CD8+ T Cells: Optimal Soldiers in the War against 
Viruses and Tumors.” Immunologic Research 31 (1): 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1385/IR:31:1:13. 
Almeida, Jorge R., David A. Price, Laura Papagno, Zaïna Aït Arkoub, Delphine Sauce, Ethan Bornstein, 
Tedi E. Asher, et al. 2007. “Superior Control of HIV-1 Replication by CD8+ T Cells Is Reflected by 
Their Avidity, Polyfunctionality, and Clonal Turnover.” Journal of Experimental Medicine 204 (10): 
2473–85. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20070784. 
  17 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Andreatta, Massimo, and Santiago J. Carmona. 2021. “UCell: Robust and Scalable Single-Cell Gene 
Signature  Scoring.”  Computational  and  Structural  Biotechnology  Journal  19:  3796–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2021.06.043. 
Bacher, Petra, Elisa Rosati, Daniela Esser, Gabriela Rios Martini, Carina Saggau, Esther Schiminsky, 
Justina  Dargvainiene,  et  al.  2020.  “Low-Avidity  CD4+  T  Cell  Responses  to  SARS-CoV-2  in 
Unexposed Individuals and Humans with Severe COVID-19.” Immunity 53 (6): 1258-1271.e5. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2020.11.016. 
Badovinac, Vladimir P, Amy R Tvinnereim, and John T Harty. 2000. “Regulation of Antigen-Specific 
CD8+  T  Cell  Homeostasis  by  Perforin  and  Interferon-γ.”  Science  290  (5495):  1354–57. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.290.5495.1354. 
Berger, Christoph T., Nicole Frahm, David A. Price, Beatriz Mothe, Musie Ghebremichael, Kari L. 
Hartman,  Leah  M.  Henry,  et  al.  2011.  “High-Functional-Avidity  Cytotoxic  T  Lymphocyte 
Responses to HLA-B-Restricted Gag-Derived Epitopes Associated with Relative HIV Control.” 
Journal of Virology 85 (18): 9334–45. https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.00460-11. 
Bhat, Purnima, Graham Leggatt, Nigel Waterhouse, and Ian H Frazer. 2017. “Interferon-γ Derived from 
Cytotoxic Lymphocytes Directly Enhances Their Motility and Cytotoxicity.” Cell Death \& Disease 
8 (6): e2836. https://doi.org/10.1038/cddis.2017.67. 
Borcherding, Nicholas, Nicholas L. Bormann, and Gloria Kraus. 2020. “ScRepertoire: An R-Based Toolkit 
for  Single-Cell  Immune  Receptor  Analysis.”  F1000Research  9:  1–17. 
https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.22139.2. 
Buchholz, Veit R., Michael Flossdorf, Inge Hensel, Lorenz Kretschmer, Bianca Weissbrich, Patricia Gräf, 
Admar Verschoor, Matthias Schiemann, Thomas Höfer, and Dirk H. Busch. 2013. “Disparate 
Individual  Fates  Compose  Robust  CD8+  T  Cell  Immunity.”  Science  340  (6132):  630–35. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1235454. 
Buchholz, Veit R, Ton N M Schumacher, and Dirk H Busch. 2016. “T Cell Fate at the Single-Cell Level.” 
Annual Review of Immunology 34 (1): 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-immunol-032414-
112014. 
Butz, Eric A., and Michael J. Bevan. 1998. “Massive Expansion of Antigen-Specific CD8+ T Cells during 
an  Acute  Virus  Infection.”  Immunity  8  (2):  167–75.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-
7613(00)80469-0. 
Castro, Flávia, Ana Patrícia Cardoso, Raquel Madeira Gonçalves, Karine Serre, and Maria José Oliveira. 
2018.  “Interferon-Gamma  at  the  Crossroads  of  Tumor  Immune  Surveillance  or  Evasion.” 
Frontiers in Immunology 9: 847. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.00847. 
Cox, Maureen A., Scott R. Barnum, Daniel C. Bullard, and Allan J. Zajac. 2013. “ICAM-1-Dependent 
Tuning of Memory CD8 T-Cell Responses Following Acute Infection.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America  110  (4):  1416–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1213480110. 
Dolton, Garry, Katie Tungatt, Angharad Lloyd, Valentina Bianchi, Sarah M Theaker, Andrew Trimby, 
Christopher J Holland, et al. 2015. “More Tricks with Tetramers: A Practical Guide to Staining T 
Cells  with  Peptide–MHC  Multimers.”  Immunology  146  (1):  11–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/imm.12499. 
Dolton, Garry, Efthalia Zervoudi, Cristina Rius, Aaron Wall, Hannah L Thomas, Anna Fuller, Lorraine 
Yeo, et al. 2018. “Optimized Peptide–MHC Multimer Protocols for Detection and Isolation of 
Autoimmune  T-Cells.”  Frontiers  in  Immunology  9:  1378. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.01378. 
Gérard, Audrey, Omar Khan, Peter Beemiller, Erin Oswald, Joyce Hu, Mehrdad Matloubian, and 
Matthew  F  Krummel.  2013.  “Secondary  T  Cell–T  Cell  Synaptic  Interactions  Drive  the 
Differentiation  of  Protective  CD8+  T  Cells.”  Nature  Immunology  14  (4):  356–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.2547. 
Gerlach, Carmen, E. Ashley Moseman, Scott M. Loughhead, David Alvarez, Anthonie J. Zwijnenburg, 
Lisette Waanders, Rohit Garg, Juan C. de la Torre, and Ulrich H. von Andrian. 2016. “The 
  18 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Chemokine  Receptor  CX3CR1  Defines  Three  Antigen-Experienced  CD8 T  Cell  Subsets  with 
Distinct  Roles  in  Immune  Surveillance  and  Homeostasis.”  Immunity  45  (6):  1270–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2016.10.018. 
Gerlach, Carmen, Jan C. Rohr, Leïla Perié, Nienke Van Rooij, Jeroen W.J. Van Heijst, Arno Velds, Jos 
Urbanus, et al. 2013. “Heterogeneous Differentiation Patterns of Individual CD8+ T Cells.” 
Science 340 (6132): 635–39. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1235487. 
Gocher, Angela M, Creg J Workman, and Dario A A Vignali. 2021. “Interferon-γ: Teammate or 
Opponent  in  the  Tumour  Microenvironment?”  Nature  Reviews  Immunology,  1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577-021-00566-3. 
Hebeisen, Michael, Susanne G. Oberle, Danilo Presotto, Daniel E. Speiser, Dietmar Zehn, and Nathalie 
Rufer. 2013. “Molecular Insights for Optimizing T Cell Receptor Specificity against Cancer.” 
Frontiers in Immunology 4 (JUN): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00154. 
Hillaire, M. L.B., G. F. Rimmelzwaan, and J. H.C.M. Kreijtz. 2013. “Clearance of Influenza Virus 
Infections by T Cells: Risk of Collateral Damage?” Current Opinion in Virology 3 (4): 430–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coviro.2013.05.002. 
Hussain, Tabinda, and Kylie M Quinn. 2019. “Similar but Different: Virtual Memory CD8 T Cells as a 
Memory-like  Cell  Population.”  Immunology  and  Cell  Biology  97  (7):  675–84. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/imcb.12277. 
Ioannidou, Kalliopi, Petra Baumgaertner, Philippe O. Gannon, Michel F. Speiser, Mathilde Allard, 
Michael Hebeisen, Nathalie Rufer, and Daniel E. Speiser. 2017. “Heterogeneity Assessment of 
Functional  T  Cell  Avidity.”  Scientific  Reports  7  (March):  1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44320. 
Kaech, Susan M, and Weiguo Cui. 2012. “Transcriptional Control of Effector and Memory CD8+ T Cell 
Differentiation.” Nature Reviews Immunology 12 (11): 749–61. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri3307. 
Kavazović, Inga, Hongya Han, Giulia Balzaretti, Erik Slinger, Niels A W Lemmermann, Anja ten Brinke, 
Doron Merkler, et al. 2020. “Eomes Broadens the Scope of CD8 T-Cell Memory by Inhibiting 
Apoptosis  in  Cells  of  Low  Affinity.”  PLOS  Biology  18  (3):  e3000648. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000648. 
King, Carolyn G, Sabrina Koehli, Barbara Hausmann, Mathias Schmaler, Dietmar Zehn, and Ed Palmer. 
2012. “T Cell Affinity Regulates Asymmetric Division, Effector Cell Differentiation, and Tissue 
Pathology.” Immunity 37 (4): 709–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2012.06.021. 
Knudson, Karin M., Nicholas P. Goplen, Cody A. Cunningham, Mark A. Daniels, and Emma Teixeiro. 
2013. “Low-Affinity T Cells Are Programmed to Maintain Normal Primary Responses but Are 
Impaired  in  Their  Recall  to  Low-Affinity  Ligands.”  Cell  Reports  4  (3):  554–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.008. 
Krummel, Matthew F, Jagdish N Mahale, Lion F K Uhl, Emily A Hardison, Adriana M Mujal, Julie M 
Mazet, Robert J Weber, Zev J Gartner, and Audrey Gérard. 2018. “Paracrine Costimulation of IFN-
γ Signaling by Integrins Modulates CD8 T Cell Differentiation.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 115 (45): 201804556. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1804556115. 
Laugel, Bruno, Hugo A van den Berg, Emma Gostick, David K Cole, Linda Wooldridge, Jonathan Boulter, 
Anita Milicic, David A Price, and Andrew K Sewell. 2007. “Different T Cell Receptor Affinity 
Thresholds and CD8 Coreceptor Dependence Govern Cytotoxic T Lymphocyte Activation and 
Tetramer  Binding  Properties*.”  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry  282  (33):  23799–810. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.m700976200. 
Lee, Sang Hun, Javier A. Carrero, Ravindra Uppaluri, J. Michael White, Jessica M. Archambault, Koon 
Siew Lai, Szeman Ruby Chan, Kathleen C. F. Sheehan, Emil R. Unanue, and Robert D. Schreiber. 
2013. “ Identifying the Initiating Events of Anti- Listeria Responses Using Mice with Conditional 
Loss of IFN-γ Receptor Subunit 1 (IFNGR1) .” The Journal of Immunology 191 (8): 4223–34. 
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1300910. 
Maekawa, Yoichi, Yoshiaki Minato, Chieko Ishifune, Takeshi Kurihara, Akiko Kitamura, Hidefumi 
Kojima, Hideo Yagita, et al. 2008. “Notch2 Integrates Signaling by the Transcription Factors RBP-
  19 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
J  and  CREB1  to  Promote  T  Cell  Cytotoxicity.”  Nature  Immunology  9  (10):  1140–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.1649. 
Martinez, Ryan J., Rakieb Andargachew, Hunter A. Martinez, and Brian D. Evavold. 2016. “Low-Affinity 
CD4+ T Cells Are Major Responders in the Primary Immune Response.” Nature Communications 
7 (December): 13848. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13848. 
Martinez, Ryan J., and Brian D. Evavold. 2015. “Lower Affinity T Cells Are Critical Components and 
Active Participants of the Immune Response.” Frontiers in Immunology 6 (September): 468. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2015.00468. 
Mazet, Julie M., Jagdish N. Mahale, Orion Tong, Robert A. Watson, Ana Victoria Lechuga-Vieco, 
Gabriela Pirgova, Vivian W.C. Lau, et al. 2023. “IFNγ Signaling in Cytotoxic T Cells Restricts Anti-
Tumor Responses by Inhibiting the Maintenance and Diversity of Intra-Tumoral Stem-like T 
Cells.” Nature Communications 14 (1): 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-35948-9. 
Moran, Amy E, Keli L Holzapfel, Yan Xing, Nicole R Cunningham, Jonathan S Maltzman, Jennifer Punt, 
and Kristin A Hogquist. 2011. “T Cell Receptor Signal Strength in Treg and INKT Cell Development 
Demonstrated by a Novel Fluorescent Reporter Mouse.” The Journal of Experimental Medicine 
208 (6): 1279–89. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20110308. 
Pace, Luigia, Andy Tempez, Catharina Arnold-Schrauf, Fabrice Lemaitre, Philippe Bousso, Luc Fetler, 
Tim Sparwasser, and Sebastian Amigorena. 2012. “Regulatory T Cells Increase the Avidity of 
Primary  CD8+  T  Cell  Responses  and  Promote  Memory.”  Science  338  (6106):  532–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1227049. 
Pettmann, Johannes, Anna Huhn, Enas Abu Shah, Mikhail A. Kutuzov, Daniel B. Wilson, Michael L. 
Dustin, Simon J. Davis, P. Anton van der Merwe, and Omer Dushek. 2021. “The Discriminatory 
Power of the t Cell Receptor.” ELife 10: 1–42. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.67092. 
Reinhardt, R Lee, Hong-Erh Liang, and Richard M Locksley. 2009. “Cytokine-Secreting Follicular T Cells 
Shape  the  Antibody  Repertoire.”  Nature  Immunology  10  (4):  385–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.1715. 
Richard, Arianne C., Aaron T. L. Lun, Winnie W. Y. Lau, Berthold Göttgens, John C. Marioni, and Gillian 
M. Griffiths. 2018. “T Cell Cytolytic Capacity Is Independent of Initial Stimulation Strength.” 
Nature Immunology 19 (8): 849–58. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-018-0160-9. 
Richer, Martin J., Jeffrey C. Nolz, and John T. Harty. 2013. “Pathogen-Specific Inflammatory Milieux 
Tune the Antigen Sensitivity of CD8+ T Cells by Enhancing T Cell Receptor Signaling.” Immunity 
38 (1): 140–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2012.09.017. 
Rutishauser, Rachel L., and Susan M. Kaech. 2010. “Generating Diversity: Transcriptional Regulation 
of Effector and Memory CD8+ T-Cell Differentiation.” Immunological Reviews 235 (1): 219–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0105-2896.2010.00901.x. 
Schober, Kilian, Florian Voit, Simon Grassmann, Thomas R Müller, Joel Eggert, Sebastian Jarosch, 
Bianca Weißbrich, et al. 2020. “Reverse TCR Repertoire Evolution toward Dominant Low-Affinity 
Clones  during  Chronic  CMV  Infection.”  Nature  Immunology  21  (4):  434–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-020-0628-2. 
Sercan, Özen, Diana Stoycheva, Günter J Hämmerling, Bernd Arnold, and Thomas Schüler. 2010. “IFN-
γ Receptor Signaling Regulates Memory CD8+ T Cell Differentiation.” The Journal of Immunology 
184 (6): 2855–62. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.0902708. 
Shakiba, Mojdeh, Paul Zumbo, Gabriel Espinosa-Carrasco, Laura Menocal, Friederike Dündar, Sandra 
E. Carson, Emmanuel M. Bruno, et al. 2021. “TCR Signal Strength Defines Distinct Mechanisms of 
T  Cell  Dysfunction  and  Cancer  Evasion.”  Journal  of  Experimental  Medicine  219  (2). 
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20201966. 
Simon,  Sylvain,  Virginie  Vignard,  Laetitia  Florenceau,  B.  Dreno,  A.  Khammari,  F.  Lang,  and  N. 
Labarriere.  2016.  “PD-1  Expression  Conditions  T  Cell  Avidity  within  an  Antigen-Specific 
Repertoire.” OncoImmunology 5 (1): 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1080/2162402X.2015.1104448. 
Smith, A. L., M. E. Wikstrom, and B. Fazekas de. 2000. “Visualizing T Cell Competition for Peptide/MHC 
Complexes: A Specific Mechanism to Minimize the Effect of Precursor Frequency.” Immunity 13 
  20 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
(6): 783–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1074-7613(00)00076-5. 
Solouki, Sabrina, Weishan Huang, Jessica Elmore, Candice Limper, Fei Huang, and Avery August. 2020. 
“ TCR Signal Strength and Antigen Affinity Regulate CD8 + Memory T Cells .” The Journal of 
Immunology 205 (5): 1217–27. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1901167. 
Stemberger, Christian, Katharina M Huster, Martina Koffler, Florian Anderl, Matthias Schiemann, 
Hermann Wagner, and Dirk H Busch. 2007. “A Single Naive CD8+ T Cell Precursor Can Develop 
into  Diverse  Effector  and  Memory  Subsets.”  Immunity  27  (6):  985–97. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2007.10.012. 
Tewari, Kavita, Yumi Nakayama, and M Suresh. 2007. “Role of Direct Effects of IFN-γ on T Cells in the 
Regulation  of  CD8  T  Cell  Homeostasis.”  The  Journal  of  Immunology  179  (4):  2115–25. 
https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.179.4.2115. 
Thiele, Daniel, Nicole L La Gruta, Angela Nguyen, and Tabinda Hussain. 2020. “Hiding in Plain Sight: 
Virtually Unrecognizable Memory Phenotype CD8+ T Cells.” International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences 21 (22): 8626. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21228626. 
van Gisbergen,  Klaas P.J.M.,  Paul L.  Klarenbeek,  Natasja A.M.  Kragten,  Peter-Paul A.  Unger, 
Marieke B.B. Nieuwenhuis, Felix M. Wensveen, Anja ten Brinke, et al. 2011. “The Costimulatory 
Molecule CD27 Maintains Clonally Diverse CD8+ T Cell Responses of Low Antigen Affinity to 
Protect  against  Viral  Variants.”  Immunity  35  (1):  97–108. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2011.04.020. 
Viegas, Nuno, Lisa Andzinski, Ching Fang Wu, Ronja Melinda Komoll, Nelson Gekara, Kurt E. Dittmar, 
Siegfried Weiss, and Jadwiga Jablonska. 2013. “IFN-γ Production by CD27+ NK Cells Exacerbates 
Listeria Monocytogenes Infection in Mice by Inhibiting Granulocyte Mobilization.” European 
Journal of Immunology 43 (10): 2626–37. https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201242937. 
Viganò, Selena, Daniel T. Utzschneider, Matthieu Perreau, Giuseppe Pantaleo, Dietmar Zehn, and 
Alexandre Harari. 2012. “Functional Avidity: A Measure to Predict the Efficacy of Effector T 
Cells?” Clinical and Developmental Immunology 2012. https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/153863. 
White, Jason T, Eric W Cross, Matthew A Burchill, Thomas Danhorn, Martin D McCarter, Hugo R Rosen, 
Brian O’Connor, and Ross M Kedl. 2016. “Virtual Memory T Cells Develop and Mediate Bystander 
Protective Immunity in an IL-15-Dependent Manner.” Nature Communications 7 (1): 11291. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11291. 
Whitmire, Jason K. 2011. “Induction and Function of Virus-Specific CD4+ T Cell Responses.” Virology 
411 (2): 216–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2010.12.015. 
Whitmire, Jason K, Boreth Eam, Nicola Benning, and J Lindsay Whitton. 2007. “Direct Interferon-γ 
Signaling Dramatically Enhances CD4+ and CD8+ T Cell Memory.” The Journal of Immunology 179 
(2): 1190–97. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.179.2.1190. 
Wong, Phillip, and Eric G. Pamer. 2003. “CD8 T Cell Responses to Infectious Pathogens.” Annual Review 
of Immunology 21 (2): 29–70. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.21.120601.141114. 
Yerly, Daniel, David Heckerman, Todd M. Allen, John V. Chisholm, Kellie Faircloth, Caitlyn H. Linde, 
Nicole Frahm, et al. 2008. “Increased Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Epitope Variant Cross-Recognition 
and Functional Avidity Are Associated with Hepatitis C Virus Clearance.” Journal of Virology 82 
(6): 3147–53. https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.02252-07. 
Zehn, Dietmar, Sarah Y Lee, and Michael J Bevan. 2009. “Complete but Curtailed T-Cell Response to 
Very Low-Affinity Antigen.” Nature 458 (7235): 211–14. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07657. 
Zenke, Simon, Margriet M Palm, Julia Braun, Alina Gavrilov, Philippa Meiser, Jan P Böttcher, Niklas 
Beyersdorf, et al. 2020. “Quorum Regulation via Nested Antagonistic Feedback Circuits Mediated 
by the Receptors CD28 and CTLA-4 Confers Robustness to T Cell Population Dynamics.” Immunity 
52 (2): 313--327.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2020.01.018. 
 
  21 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A B
WT WT 1/12  lost less than 90% of starting weight
CD8-IFN-γRKO KO 5/12  lost less than 90% of starting weight
ns
100 110
ns
ns
95 ns 100
%) %)
ht ( 90 ** ht ( 90
g g
Wei Wei
85 80 WT
CD8-IFN-γRKO
80 70
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 5 10
Time post infection [d] Time post infection [d]
C D
100 100
WT
95 CD8-IFN-γRKO al
v
%) urvi
ht ( 90 **** of S 50
Weig 85 bility 
a
b
80 o WT
Pr ****
CD8-IFN-γRKO
75 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
Time post infection [d] Time post infection [d]
E F G
Input ns
Ctrl
6
100 ns
d] ed]
N4-loaded malise 98 maliz 4
670Fluor %) [nor 96 %) [nor
e Ctrl CWDT8-IFN-γR city ( 94 +P-1 ( 2
KO xi M
o 92
N4-loaded ytot LA
C
90 0
WT  KO  WT  KO 
CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR
CFSE
H I J
7 ns 30 ns 15
**
40] a.i)
%) 6 x1 y (
+mer ( + (#) [20 avidit10
a 5 er e 
bK-N4 tetr 4 N4 tetram10 N4 relativ 5
bK- bK-
3 0 0
WT  KO  WT  KO  WT  KO 
CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR
FFiigguurree  11

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A B C D
Gated on CD8+ Gated on tetramer+ Gated on tetramer+ Gated on tetramer+
5 ** CD8-IFN-γR 1.6 2.5 ns
KKOO
****
%)4 er)  1.4 zed]2.0
b+K-N4 tetramer (123 WWTT b-N4 tetramMFI(K[normalized]11..02 +FN-γ(%) [normali11..05
g I
0 0.8 0.5
WT  KO  WT  KO  WT  KO 
Kb-N4 tetramer (AF647)
CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR
E F G H
100 100
WT
15 CD8-IFN-γRKO 5
* *
x) 75 x) 75
a a 4
+(% of mIFN-γ 50 -11C (x10)[M]50105 +IFN-γ(% of m 50 -10C (x10)[M]5023
25 E 25 E
1
WT
CD8-IFN-γRKO
0 0 0 0
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8
WT  KO  WT  KO 
log  N4 [M]
10 CD8-IFN-γR log10 N4 [M] CD8-IFN-γR
I J K
100
N2.0 **
WT 0p 2.5 ***
0 *
CD8-IFN-γRKO 0
75 1 **
%) g at 1.5 WT2.0
ells ( 50 ndin KO/1.5
und T-c T-cell bi1.0 FN-γR 1.0
Bo 25 zed 0.5 T-I I
ali O0.5
m
or
0 N0.0 0.0
0 250 500 750 1000
WT  KO  4 4 7 4 4
N T H V G
Force (pN) CD8-IFN-γR Q4
LM-OVAp
Figure 2

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A ns B ns C
10 ** ** 2.5 ** ** ns
4000
%) 8 er)  2.0 ns ns
+etramer ( 46 N4 tetrammalized]11..05 FI (CD3) 23000000
b-N4 tK 2 b-MFI(K[nor0.5 gM 1000
g
0 0.0 0
- 24h +d6 - 24h +d6 - 24h +d6
16- d5 16- d5 16- d5
anti-IFN-γ anti-IFN-γ  anti-IFN-γ
D E F
d9 post-infection d9 post-infection
8 15 1.5
**** ns ns
6 %) er) 
s (%) +mer ( 10 etramzed] 1.0
ell 4 a 4 tali
NK c 4 tetr 5 bK-Nnorm 0.5
2 bK-N MFI([
g
0 0 0.0
anti- anti- anti-
Mock Mock Mock
NK1.1 NK1.1 NK1.1
G H I J
       IFN-γ KO
24h post-infection d9 post-infection d9 post-infection
       CD8-IFN-γ KO
       CD8-IFN-γ WT 3.0 20 1.4
ns **
50
**
**** 2.5 **** %) 15 er) 
+N-γ cells (%)234000 ns MFI (pSTAT1) normalised] 12..50 +4 tetramer ( 10 bK-N4 tetramnormalized]11..02
IF10 g [ 1.0 bK-N 5 MFI([
g
0 0.5 0 0.8
ImCmDu8ne celNl sKu1b.t1ype N-γ KO W T KO        CWDT8-IFNK-Oγ        CWDT8-IFNK-γO
F
 I        CD8-IFN-γ
Figure 3

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A B C
Naive T TM
VM
Ccr7
Sell Expression
200
3 Lef1 -1.0
Cd44 P
2_ Naive ENokmg7es -00..50 go01
PAM0 Cxcr3 0.5 L-100
U Tbx21 1.0
Il2rb
-3
Cd5
TVM Itga4
TM
Cx3cr1
0
-6
-5.0 -2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 -2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0
UMAP_1 UMAP_1
D E F
80 ****
****
% Expressing Cells 80 ****
****
+% of IFN-γ cells that are 246000 NaTTivVMTTeMV   M(((MLLL  (M(MMccoo---OOOnnttVVVrrooAAAll))))) Average E1234500x00000..p05ression +% of IFN-γ cells that are246000
-0.5
0 Naive (control)
-1.0  0
Naive T TM
VM aive T VM TM aive T VM TM
N N
LM-OVA LM-gp33
G ns H I J
25 **** 60 **** 50 *** *** 8 ***
**
20 %)40
+N-γ cells (%) 1105 **** +N-γ cells (%) 2400 nsns **** +γ OT-I cells (2300 + cells (%)N-γ 46
IF 5 IF IFN-10 IF 2
0 0 0 0
TCR - + + + + - - TCR - - - - + + + + Naive OVA gp33 a-IL-12/-18     -         -       +     
IL-12 - - - - + + + +
IL-12 - - + + - + - IL-18 - - - - + + + + a-MHC-I     -        +       +    
LM
IL-18 - - + - + - + IL-2 - + - - - + - -
IL-7 - - + - - - + -
IL-15 - - - + - - - +
K L M   Kruskal-Wallis, p = 0.014
0.013
2.00 T  clusters
4 EMRA
0.74
e
u A
21.75 val RME 0.024
_PAMU11..2550 71 2 rIeFsNp. 3 65 XCL1/2 -log adjusted p-1015000 T nihtiw T fo noMV00..24
0 itro
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 po 0
UMAP_1 log2 fold change rP Healthy COVID COVID
mild severe
Figure 4

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A B
CD8-IFN-γRKO WT 4 Klrg1
6
2
Sell
le 2
3 ve Eomes
L
 n 2
2_ ois Tbx21
PAM0 serp 6 Ccl5
U xE 3
Cx3cr1
-3
3
Mki67
-6 C x 3 cr1C- x 3 cr1+ S L E C C y clin g
-5 0 5 10 -5 0 5 10
MPEC
UMAP_1
C 6 SLEC Cycling Cx3cr1- MPEC Cx3cr1+ MPEC
4 4 4
O 4
K
R
γ
-N
F 2 2 2 2
I-8
D
C
0 0 0 0
0 2 4 6 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4
WT
D E F WT G WT
CD8-IFN-γRKO CD8-IFN-γRKO
100 30 3.4 ns ns ns ns 0.5 ns ns *
ns ns
Cs (%)6800 Cs (%) 20 CR diversity33..02 with Cycling00..34
SLE40 MPE10 nal T2.8 erlap 0.2
o v
20 Cl2.6 O0.1
0 0 2.4 0.0
CWD8T-IFNK-γOR CWD8T-IFNK-γOR Cx3cr1-Cx3cr1+ SLECCycling Cx3cr1- Cx3cr1+ SLEC
MPEC MPEC
Figure 5

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.06.531375; this version posted March 8, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is 
made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
A B C
100 OT-I WT 100 OT-I WT 2.0 *
OT-I IFN-γRKO OT-I IFN-γRKO **
ns ns ns *** ns
80 ns ns ns ** 80 WT1.5
%) %) O/
Cs (60 Cs (60 γR K1.0
LE40 PE40 N-
S M F
T-I I0.5
20 20 O
0 0 0.0
N4 T4 Q4H7 V4 N4 T4 Q4H7 V4 N4 Q4H7 V4
LM-OVAp LM-OVAp LM-OVAp
D E F
Gated on tetramer+ (AF647) d9 post-infection d9 post-infection
ns
1.4 ** 1.4
SLECs MPECs SLECs 4 tetramer) normalized]11..23 4 tetramer) normalized]1.2
MPECs bMFI(K-NSLECs [11..01 b-NMFI(KMPECs [1.0
gof  gof 
0.9 0.8
Kb-N4 tetramer (AF647) WT KO WT KO
CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR
G H
LM-OVA Influenza-OVA
1.2 1.5
* *
mer)  1.0 mer)  1.0
etrazed] etrazed]
4 tali0.8 4 tali
Nm Nm
bFI(K-[nor bFI(K-[nor0.5
M 0.6 M
g g
0.0
WT KO WT KO
CD8-IFN-γR CD8-IFN-γR
I J K L
Lymph Node Lymph Node Lung Lung
10 * 1.2 50 ** 1.5
* **
b+K-NP tetramer (%)68 8246 bMFI(K-NP tetramer) 68[normalized]01..80 b+K-NP tetramer (%)6831240000 bMFI(K-NP tetramer) 68[normalized]01..50
g 0.6 g
0 0 0.0
WT KO WT KO WT KO WT KO
       CD8-IFN-γR        CD8-IFN-γR        CD8-IFN-γR        CD8-IFN-γR
Figure 6

NEW PAGE