bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Title 
Sanglifehrin A mitigates multi-organ fibrosis in vivo by inducing secretion of the collagen 
chaperone cyclophilin B  
 
Authors 
Hope A. Flaxman1, Maria-Anna Chrysovergi2, Hongwei Han2, Farah Kabir1, Rachael T. Lister2, 
Chia-Fu Chang1, Katharine E. Black2, David Lagares2,*, Christina M. Woo1,* 
 
1 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
2 Fibrosis Research Center, Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases, Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA 
* Corresponding authors. Emails: C. M. Woo, cwoo@chemistry.harvard.edu; D. Lagares, 
davidlagares@gmail.com; dlagares@mgh.harvard.edu. 
 
 
 
 
 
  1 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Abstract 
Pathological deposition and crosslinking of collagen type I by activated myofibroblasts drives 
progressive tissue fibrosis. Therapies that inhibit collagen synthesis by myofibroblasts have 
clinical  potential  as  anti-fibrotic  agents.  Lysine  hydroxylation  by  the  prolyl-3-hydroxylase 
complex, comprised of cartilage associated protein, prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1, and cyclophilin B, is 
essential for collagen type I crosslinking and formation of stable fibers. Here, we identify the 
collagen chaperone cyclophilin B as a major cellular target of the macrocyclic natural product 
sanglifehrin A (SfA) using photo-affinity labeling and chemical proteomics. Our studies reveal a 
unique mechanism of action in which SfA binding to cyclophilin B in the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) induces the secretion of cyclophilin B to the extracellular space, preventing TGF-β1–
activated myofibroblasts from synthesizing collagen type I in vitro without inhibiting collagen 
type I mRNA transcription or inducing ER stress. In addition, SfA prevents collagen type I 
secretion without affecting myofibroblast contractility or TGF-β1 signaling. In vivo, we provide 
chemical, molecular, functional, and translational evidence that SfA mitigates the development of 
lung and skin fibrosis in mouse models by inducing cyclophilin B secretion, thereby inhibiting 
collagen synthesis from fibrotic fibroblasts in vivo. Consistent with these findings in preclinical 
models, SfA reduces collagen type I secretion from fibrotic human lung fibroblasts and precision 
cut lung slices from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a fatal fibrotic lung disease with 
limited therapeutic options. Our results identify the primary liganded target of SfA in cells, the 
collagen chaperone cyclophilin B, as a new mechanistic target for the treatment of organ fibrosis. 
   
  2 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Introduction 
Fibrosis is a pathological process characterized by excessive deposition of collagen-rich 
extracellular matrix in response to chronic or overwhelming tissue injury,1 ultimately leading to 
the development of fibrotic diseases that can affect nearly every organ including the skin,2 lungs,3 
liver,4 and kidneys.5,6 Progressive tissue fibrosis eventually results in failure of the affected organs 
and death. Skin and lung fibrosis are hallmarks of fatal fibrotic diseases such as systemic sclerosis 
(SSc), an autoimmune multi-organ fibrotic disease,7,8 and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), an 
age-related interstitial lung disease.9 In these diseases, tissue fibrogenesis is driven by chronic 
epithelial and vascular damage, type 2 inflammation, and activation of scar-forming cells known 
as myofibroblasts.10,11 Injury-activated epithelial, vascular, and immune cells release pro-fibrotic 
mediators  that  promote  the  activation,  differentiation,  and  survival  of  myofibroblasts.8,12,13 
Targeting inflammation with recombinant interferon gamma,14 TNF-α neutralizing antibodies,15 
and immunosuppressive low doses of prednisone and azathioprine16 has not shown therapeutic 
efficacy and may even worsen lung fibrosis in patients with SSc and IPF. Separately, efforts to 
understand  the  biology  of  myofibroblasts  have  led  to  the  identification  of  two  molecules, 
pirfenidone and nintedanib, which prevent collagen synthesis induced by the pro-fibrotic cytokine 
transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1).17,18 In 2014, the FDA approved these two drugs for the 
treatment of IPF, marking a turning point for treatment of fibrosis.19 More recently, nintedanib has 
also received approval for the treatment of chronic fibrosing interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) and 
ILD associated with SSc (SSc-ILD).20,21 Despite being approved for clinical use, the mechanisms 
of action of pirfenidone and nintedanib remain incompletely understood. Pirfenidone has been 
shown to inhibit TGF-β1–induced collagen secretion by fibrotic fibroblasts through unclear 
mechanisms,17 while nintedanib is a potent multi-kinase inhibitor that acts on platelet-derived 
  3 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and fibroblast growth factor signaling.18 A 
greater understanding of these drugs’ molecular target(s) and mechanism(s) of action may allow 
for improvements upon the modest efficacy and low tolerability due to off-target side effects 
observed in the current generation of therapies. There is a continuing need to better elucidate the 
biology  of  myofibroblasts  in  order  to  develop  anti-fibrotic  agents  targeting  myofibroblast 
activation and collagen synthesis with greater selectivity and improved efficacy 1.  
Advances in our understanding of the biology of myofibroblast activation have led to the 
identification  of  novel  pro-fibrotic  mediators  that  promote  the  synthesis,  deposition,  and 
remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in fibrotic disease.1,5,7,8 These efforts have enabled 
the development of both small molecules and biologics aimed at targeting these pro-fibrotic 
pathways, several of which are currently being tested in phase II and III clinical trials.22,23 Novel 
approaches including drug repurposing are an attractive alternative to de novo development of 
anti-fibrotic therapies due to the use of de-risked compounds, some of them already tested in 
clinical trials, potentially shortening development timelines. One of the challenges related to this 
strategy is the identification of specific targets blocked by agents with anti-fibrotic properties, as 
exemplified by pirfenidone, whose mechanism of action remains to be determined. Chemical 
proteomics  methods  like  photo-affinity  labeling  (PAL)  have  allowed  for  unbiased  target 
identification studies across the proteome to illuminate binding interactions inside live cells. In a 
PAL experiment, a small molecule probe functionalized with a photo-activatable group, such as a 
diazirine, is added to cells and covalently conjugated to interacting protein targets upon UV 
irradiation. The labeled proteins are enriched and identified by mass spectrometry (MS).24,25 We 
and others have identified novel protein interactions of small molecule fragments, metabolites, and 
drug compounds using this approach.24,26,27 However, despite the wide use of PAL to revealed 
  4 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
novel targets of small molecules in cells, it has yet to be applied to the characterization of novel 
anti-fibrotic targets. 
Here, we apply chemical proteomics to understand the mechanism of action of the natural 
product  sanglifehrin  A  (SfA),  a  molecule  with  anti-proliferative  and  immunosuppressant 
properties that was discovered by Novartis in 1999 and whose molecular targets remain only 
partially understood. SfA is composed of a 22-membered macrocyclic ring decorated with a unique 
spirolactam that was identified in a screen for bacterially produced compounds that bind to the 
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase cyclophilin A (PPIA).28,29 PPIA is also the target of the 
immunosuppressive drug cyclosporin A (CsA), and the PPIA:CsA complex binds to and inhibit 
the phosphatase calcineurin, ultimately blocking the proliferation of activated T cells.30-33 Prior 
investigations have shown that SfA is mechanistically distinct from other immunosuppressants, 
including CsA and rapamycin,34 and that SfA blocks cell proliferation at the G1–S phase transition 
by induction of p53 expression via NFκB signaling.35,36 Recent studies have shown that SfA forms 
a  ternary  complex  with  PPIA  and  the  cystathionine  beta  synthase  domain  of  inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 (IMPDH2), which contributes to the anti-proliferative effects of 
SfA, 37 and our recent structure–activity relationship studies suggest that SfA may exert its effects 
through additional targets.38 While studies have shown that SfA engages several cyclophilins by 
in vitro biochemical assays,29 an accurate profile of the interactions of SfA across all cyclophilins 
in live cells is challenging, where contributions from both binding affinities and the subcellular 
localization of SfA and its target proteins contribute to the interaction landscape. We used a 
chemical proteomics approach in immortalized immune cell lines to discover that SfA primarily 
interacts with cyclophilin B (PPIB) in live cells. PPIB is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–resident 
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase39,40 that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in collagen folding as 
  5 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
part of the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex, leading us to hypothesize that SfA has anti-
fibrotic effects by blocking collagen synthesis in fibrogenic fibroblasts.41-43 Our studies reveal a 
novel mechanism in fibroblasts in which SfA binding to PPIB induces the secretion of PPIB from 
the ER to the extracellular space, preventing collagen folding and synthesis by TGF-β1–activated 
myofibroblasts and fibrotic fibroblasts isolated from patients with IPF. We provide chemical, 
molecular, functional, and translational evidence that this mechanism plays an important role in 
collagen synthesis by pro-fibrotic myofibroblasts in vitro and in the development of the lung and 
skin fibrosis in vivo in a preclinical mouse model. We further show that SfA reduces collagen type 
I secretion by tissue from patients with IPF. Together, our findings identify PPIB as a major 
cellular target of SfA and demonstrate the therapeutic potential of inhibiting collagen type I 
synthesis by depletion of intracellular PPIB in fibrotic diseases such as SSc and IPF. 
 
Results 
 
Identification of cyclophilin B as a target of SfA in live cells 
To begin investigating the targets of SfA by chemical proteomics, we first synthesized two 
photo-sanglifehrin probes, pSfA1 and pSfA2, by functionalization of SfA at different positions 
with the minimalist tag, which contains a diazirine for PAL and an alkyne for enrichment (Figure 
1a).44 We designed two pSfA probes to ensure that at least one probe retained activity and to 
potentially capture a wider range of protein targets (Extended Data Figure 1a–c). The effects of 
the  probes  on  cell  viability  in  Jurkat  and  K562  cells  were  assessed  as  a  proxy  for 
immunosuppressive activity in T and B cells, respectively, and had mild immunosuppressive 
activity, similar to SfA37 (Figure 1b, Extended Data Figures 2a–b). No anti-proliferative activity 
  6 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
was observed in A549 cells, indicating that pSfA probes, like SfA,37 are not broadly cytotoxic (IC  
50
> 10 µM, Extended Data Figure 2c). Using a TR-FRET binding assay, the observed dissociation 
constants for SfA and the pSfA probes to PPIA and PPIB are generally comparable, although 
pSfA2 has reduced engagement of PPIA (Figure 1b, Extended Data Figure 3). Binding of SfA 
occurs at the highly conserved cyclophilin active site,45 which inhibits the enzymatic peptidyl-
prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPI) activity of these enzymes.46 
We next performed chemical proteomics using the pSfA probes in Jurkat and K562 cells 
in order to identify target proteins of SfA in live cells in an unbiased manner. Proteins labeled and 
enriched with pSfA1 or pSfA2 from each cell line were considered targets for SfA if they were 
selectively competed with a ten-fold excess of SfA or were enriched relative to non-specific 
labeling with the minimalist tag. Among the biological targets of SfA identified by chemical 
proteomics in live cells (Table S1), surprisingly, only PPIB was enriched significantly [log (fold 
2
change) > 1, p < 0.05] across all eight ratios, which represents comparison to SfA competition and 
background from the minimalist tag alone across two cell lines and two pSfA probes (Figure 1c, 
Extended Data Figures 4a–c, Extended Data Figure 5, Table S1). By contrast, PPIA was 
significantly enriched by pSfA2 versus competition in Jurkat and K562 cells in two of the eight 
ratios  (Figure  1c,  Extended  Data  Figures  4a–c,  Table  S1).  Other  PPIases,  including 
mitochondrial PPIF, were observed but not significantly enriched (Table S1). The observed 
cyclophilin interactions were validated by Western blot, which showed that indeed PPIB is labeled 
to a greater degree than the minimalist tag alone,47 and is additionally enriched and competed in 
both cell lines by pSfA1 and pSfA2 (Figure 1d). PPIA is labeled and enriched to a greater extent 
with pSfA2 after competition with SfA, in alignment with the MS results (Figure 1c–d). The 
pSfA2-treated samples further show a higher molecular weight band for PPIA after enrichment, 
  7 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
potentially representing an observable mass shift specifically due to pSfA2 labeling. IMPDH2, a 
previously identified target of SfA,37 showed some labeling by the pSfA probes (Extended Data 
Figure 4d), although it did not meet significance thresholds in MS data (Table S1). Despite the 
preference for PPIB observed in cells, both pSfAs labeled recombinant PPIA and PPIB similarly 
by in-gel fluorescence (Figure 1e). These results indicate that the pSfA probes, and by inference 
SfA, interact to a greater extent with PPIB than any other cyclophilins in the context of the cellular 
environment, which is uniquely revealed by the chemical proteomics approach.  
 
SfA induces secretion of cyclophilin B into the extracellular space 
A previous report has described secretion of PPIB upon CsA binding to its catalytic 
domain.48 Since SfA similarly binds to PPIB in live cells, we next sought to assess the effects of 
SfA on PPIB secretion. Notably, treatment of Jurkat cells with 1 µM SfA produced a decrease in 
intracellular PPIB protein levels and an associated increase in extracellular PPIB secreted into the 
conditioned media from these cells within 4 h (Figure 2a, Extended Data Figure 6a). No changes 
in PPIA protein levels in cells or media were observed. CsA treatment had a comparable effect on 
PPIB secretion under these conditions, SfA-induced PPIB secretion was inhibited by ER transport 
inhibitors such as brefeldin A, but not by inhibitors of other pathways, such as neddylation 
(MLN4924), proteasomal degradation (MG132), lysosomal degradation (E64d, pepstatin), or 
protein synthesis (cycloheximide, Figure 2a, Extended Data Figure 6b). These effects were 
confirmed by fluorescence microscopy for PPIB and the ER marker protein disulfide isomerase 
(PDI) in HeLa cells, which were used previously to image PPIB in the presence of CsA (Figure 
2b).48 MS analysis of secreted proteins validated the selective increase in extracellular PPIB levels 
upon SfA or CsA treatment [log2(fold change) > 1, p < 0.05, Figures 2c, 2d, Table S2], without 
  8 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
affecting cytoplasmic PPIA levels. These data suggest that the secretion of PPIB upon treatment 
with these cyclophilin binders may result from disruption of native interactions in the ER rather 
than the formation of a new complex that favors PPIB secretion. 
To investigate the role of SfA-induced PPIB secretion in mediating the immunosuppressive effects 
of SfA, we developed a novel SfA macrocycle functionalized with a primary alcohol (SfA-mc, 
Figure 2e) for comparison to SfA. Prior efforts have found that the SfA macrocycle, obtained by 
oxidative cleavage of SfA to reveal an α,β-unsaturated aldehyde, retains cyclophilin binding but 
has reduced immunosuppressive activity.37,49 We hypothesized that SfA-mc would provide a useful 
comparison for determining whether the retention of cyclophilin binding is associated with 
induction of PPIB secretion but differentiated from immunosuppressive activity. As expected, 
SfA-mc was less potent in Jurkat and K562 cell viability assays relative to SfA (Figure 2f, 
Extended Data Figures 6c–d). Further, in comparison to SfA, SfA-mc had a similar binding 
affinity for PPIB but lost some binding affinity for PPIA (Figure 2f, Extended Data Figure 3). 
Excitingly, SfA and SfA-mc induced similar changes in intracellular PPIB levels following 
treatment of Jurkat cells with 1 µM compound for 4 h (Figure 2g). No markers of ER stress were 
up-regulated in response to SfA or SfA-mc treatment after 24 h, indicating that SfA activity on 
export of PPIB does not stimulate a broader stress-response signal in cells (Figure 2h). By 
contrast, brefeldin A treatment promoted strong up-regulation of BiP, CHOP, and calnexin 
markers for ER stress. These data suggest that SfA-mediated PPIB secretion is independent of the 
immunosuppressive effects exerted by SfA on T cells and B cells and that these effects can be 
differentiated by utilizing SfA analogs.  
  
SfA inhibits collagen secretion induced by TGF-β1 in human lung fibroblasts 
  9 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Given that PPIB is critical for collagen folding,42,43 we next focused on evaluating the effect 
of SfA-induced PPIB secretion in fibrosis, which is characterized by excessive production of 
collagen type I. PPIB is a major enzyme catalyzing the rate-limiting step of pro-collagen triple 
helix folding within the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex, which is comprised of prolyl 3-
hydroxylase 1 (P3H1), cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), and PPIB.41-43 We thus reasoned that 
SfA-mediated  PPIB  secretion  might  interfere  with  collagen  type  I  synthesis  by  activated 
myofibroblasts. To investigate this hypothesis, we first studied this mechanism in TGF-β1–
activated IMR-90 human lung fibroblasts (Figure 3a). TGF-β1 is a potent pro-fibrotic factor that 
induces  fibroblast-to-myofibroblast  transdifferentiation  during  tissue  repair  and  fibrosis,  a 
phenotype characterized by increased synthesis and deposition of collagen type I and other ECM 
proteins.50,51 Unlike quiescent fibroblasts, myofibroblasts express α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), 
a protein that confers a hyper-contractile phenotype and allows myofibroblasts to remodel and 
stiffen the ECM.1,52 MS profiling of the secretome of IMR-90 human lung fibroblasts stimulated 
with TGF-β1 in the presence or absence of SfA showed that SfA treatment reduced protein levels 
of several collagens in the supernatant of TGF-β1–treated fibroblasts (Figure 3b, Table S3). SfA 
treatment also led to increased PPIB levels in fibroblast supernatants, further validating the 
induction of PPIB secretion by SfA (Figures 3b–c, Table S3). 
To further investigate whether SfA-induced PPIB secretion regulates collagen type I 
secretion by fibroblasts, we assessed collagen levels in cell lysates and supernatants by sircol assay 
and  Western  blot.  As  shown  in  Figures  3d–h,  SfA  treatment  significantly  reduced  both 
intracellular and extracellular collagen type I (COL1A1) in TGF-β1–treated fibroblasts in a dose-
dependent manner. SfA did not affect COL1A1 mRNA levels, consistent with the notion that 
production of mature, folded collagen type I, but not transcription, is inhibited by SfA (Figure 3i). 
  10 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Importantly, SfA not only binds to PPIB and induces its secretion, but also forms a PPIA:SfA 
binary complex that regulates the cell cycle via inosine-50-monophosphate dehydrogenase 2 
(IMPDH2).37 To rule out that inhibition of the PPIA:SfA:IMPDH2 pathway by SfA is contributing 
to the reduction of collagen synthesis in fibroblasts, we tested SfA-mc, which does not form a 
PPIA:SfA:IMPDH2 complex. SfA-mc potently binds to and induces secretion of PPIB and 
possesses the same potency as SfA at blocking collagen type I secretion by fibroblasts, further 
suggesting that SfA-mediated PPIB secretion is the mechanism by which collagen synthesis is 
reduced (Extended Data Figure 7a).  In addition, our experiments demonstrated that SfA inhibits 
collagen synthesis and secretion without affecting αSMA protein or mRNA levels in TGF-β1–
activated myofibroblasts, indicating that SfA does not affect the contractility of these cells 
(Figures 3j–k). Further, pro-fibrotic signaling pathways including SMAD2/3 and FAK signaling, 
which are strongly activated by TGF-β1 in myofibroblasts,53,54 are also unaffected by SfA (Figure 
3k). These results demonstrate the specific activity of SfA, which reduces collagen type I protein 
levels without affecting upstream pro-fibrotic pathways. Notably, SfA treatment also reduced 
intracellular PPIB protein levels in TGF-β1–activated myofibroblasts (Figure 3k), consistent with 
our  proposed  mechanism  of  action.  Moreover,  SfA  or  SfA-mc  treatment  did  not  induce 
myofibroblast apoptosis, in contrast to the toxicity observed in response to CsA treatment (Figure 
3l, Extended Data Figure 7b). Taken together, our data show that SfA induces PPIB secretion in 
myofibroblasts, an effect associated with a significant reduction in collagen type I levels in vitro. 
Given the major role of myofibroblasts in the development and progression of fibrotic disease, we 
next sought to investigate the therapeutic efficacy of SfA at treating fibrosis in vivo in a preclinical 
mouse model.  
 
  11 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
SfA reduces established skin fibrosis in the bleomycin mouse model 
  Our  in  vitro  studies  showed  that  SfA  inhibits  collagen  folding  and  synthesis  in 
myofibroblasts by inducing PPIB secretion, providing a strong rationale for testing the potential 
anti-fibrotic effects of SfA in vivo in a preclinical model. We opted for the well-established 
bleomycin-induced skin and lung fibrosis mouse model, which is widely used to study the biology 
of myofibroblasts and to test the efficacy of anti-fibrotic drugs in vivo.55,56 Using this model, we 
examined the therapeutic potential of SfA to treat established skin and lung fibrosis when 
administered therapeutically from day 14 to 28 after the onset of daily bleomycin challenges 
(Figure 4a). Therapeutic administration of SfA (10 mg/kg daily) significantly reduced bleomycin-
induced skin fibrosis when compared to vehicle control at day 28 post-bleomycin challenge, as 
assessed by picrosirius red staining of the skin for collagen, measurement of skin dermal thickness, 
and skin hydroxyproline content, a biochemical proxy for collagen deposition (Figures 4b–d). 
The  bleomycin-induced  increase  in  dermal  thickness  was  reduced  by  78%  in  bleomycin-
challenged,  SfA-treated  mice  compared  to  bleomycin-challenged,  vehicle-treated  mice. 
Additionally, the bleomycin-induced increase in skin hydroxyproline was reduced by 58% with 
SfA treatment, demonstrating potent anti-fibrotic effects of SfA in vivo. Immune cells have been 
also shown to promote fibrosis in this model by stimulating myofibroblast activation via secretion 
of pro-fibrotic mediators including TGF-β1.55,57 To investigate potential anti-inflammatory effects 
of SfA, we performed flow cytometry analysis of skin tissue from mice treated with or without 
SfA after saline or bleomycin challenge (Figure 4e, Extended Data Figure 8a). Our results 
demonstrated that SfA treatment significantly reduced the percentage of inflammatory monocytes 
in  the  skin  of  bleomycin-challenged,  SfA-treated  mice  compared  to  bleomycin-challenged, 
vehicle-treated mice. There was no significant difference in the percentage of macrophages, CD4+ 
  12 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
T cells, or CD8+ T cells that were present in the skin of bleomycin-challenged, SfA-treated mice 
compared to bleomycin-challenged, vehicle-treated mice (Figure 4e). Together, these results 
suggest that SfA is beneficial in treating established skin fibrosis by reducing collagen levels and 
inhibiting monocyte infiltration. 
 
SfA reduces established lung fibrosis in the bleomycin mouse model  
As subcutaneous injection of bleomycin leads to concomitant pulmonary fibrosis in mice 
(Figure 5a),58 we next examined the lungs of mice treated with or without therapeutic SfA at the 
same timepoints used for the study of skin fibrosis. Therapeutic administration of SfA significantly 
reduced histological measures of fibrosis in the lungs when compared to vehicle control at day 28 
post-bleomycin  challenge,  as  assessed  by  picrosirius  red  staining  (Figure  5b).  In  addition, 
hydroxyproline levels in lung tissue, indicative of collagen type I content, were reduced in 
bleomycin-challenged, SfA-treated mice compared to bleomycin-challenged, vehicle-treated mice 
(Figure  5c).  Notably,  SfA  treatment  also  reduced  the  increased  alveolar–capillary  barrier 
permeability induced post-bleomycin challenge, as determined by reduction in total protein levels 
in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid (Figure 5d). In addition, SfA treatment also reduced 
the number of inflammatory monocytes and macrophages in the BAL induced by bleomycin 
injury, further validating the anti-inflammatory effects of SfA (Figure 5e, Extended Data Figure 
8b). Further, SfA did not affect the percentage of CD4+ T cells although it did increase the number 
of CD8+ T cells in fibrotic lungs.  Consistent with our proposed mechanism of action SfA, 
treatment resulted in near-complete loss of PPIB from lung tissue with no changes in PPIA levels 
(Figure 5f),. These results indicate that SfA treats established lung fibrosis by reducing collagen 
levels and inhibiting monocyte infiltration; SfA treatment was also associated with reduced tissue 
  13 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
PPIB levels. To further assess our proposed mechanism of action in vivo, we next generated 
fibrotic precision-cut lung slices (PCLSs) from transgenic collagen-GFP reporter mice (Col-GFP) 
subjected to our bleomycin lung fibrosis model (Figure 5g). In this 3D ex vivo model of lung 
fibrosis, thin slices freshly prepared from fibrotic tissues represent a powerful tool to study fibrosis 
mechanism and testing anti-fibrotic responses to novel drug compounds 59,60. Our results indicate 
that treatment of murine fibrotic PCLS with SfA for 2 days reduced collagen type I levels in GFP+ 
fibrotic fibroblasts directly isolated by FACS from PCLSs (Figure 5g, 5h). Of note, COL1A1 
mRNA levels were not modulated by SfA treatment (Figure 5i), further indicating that SfA 
prevents collagen synthesis without affecting collagen mRNA transcription. In addition, SfA 
treatment resulted in reduced soluble collagen type I secretion from PCLS, as assessed in PCLS-
derived supernatant (Figure 5j). Taken together, our data support PPIB, as engaged by SfA, as a 
novel therapeutic target for the treatment of skin and lung fibrosis. 
 
SfA inhibits collagen type I secretion by precision-cut lung slices and fibrotic lung fibroblasts 
from lung tissue of patients with IPF 
To determine the relevance of this mechanism in human disease, we assessed collagen type 
I secretion from PCLSs prepared from explanted lung tissue from patients with IPF (n = 4 
individual patients; n ≥ 3 slices per patient/treatment) treated with SfA (1 μM) or vehicle for 3 days 
(Figure 6a–c). Consistent with results observed in vitro and in the preclinical mouse model, SfA 
treatment significantly reduced collagen type I protein secretion compared to vehicle control, an 
effect associated with PPIB secretion (Figure 6d–g). To further investigate anti-fibrotic effects of 
SfA in IPF, we next assessed the effects of SfA on primary human fibroblasts isolated from IPF 
patients (n = 3) and healthy controls (n = 3). The fibrotic fibroblasts isolated from IPF patients 
  14 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
secreted slightly higher levels of collagen type I into culture medium compared to normal lung 
fibroblasts in vitro using our cultured conditions (Figure 6h). Treatment with SfA (1 µM) 
significantly reduced collagen type I levels in the supernatant of IPF fibroblasts, while treatment 
of healthy control fibroblasts with SfA did not have a significant effect on collagen type I levels 
(Figure 6h). Consistent with our in vitro studies in IMR-90 cells, SfA (1 µM) treatment did not 
modulate  IPF  fibroblast  contractility,  assessed  by  αSMA  protein  levels,  or  TGF-β1/SMAD 
signaling (Figure 6i). Taken together, our human studies confirmed our proposed mechanism by 
which SfA-induced PPIB secretion inhibits collagen type I secretion from IPF fibroblasts without 
affecting other fibroblast functions or fibrogenic TGF-β1 signaling.  
 
Discussion 
Skin and lung fibrosis are lethal components and hallmarks of human fibrotic diseases such 
as SSc and IPF.1,5,7,8 The scar tissue that builds up in fibrotic disease is primarily composed of 
collagen type I, which is synthesized and secreted by myofibroblasts activated by pro-fibrotic 
mediators such as TGF-β1.1 Inhibition of TGF-β1–induced collagen type I transcription by 
myofibroblasts is thought to be the major mechanism targeted by pirfenidone and nintedanib, the 
only FDA-approved anti-fibrotic agents. However, the anti-fibrotic effects of these drugs are 
modest and associated with low tolerability due to off-target side effects. The development of 
novel anti-fibrotic agents with greater selectivity and improved efficacy requires identification of 
new drug targets and elucidation of novel mechanism(s) of action. Here, we applied PAL and 
chemical proteomics to unravel a novel mechanism of action for SfA in fibrosis. Our results 
demonstrate that SfA binds to and induces secretion of PPIB, an ER-resident chaperone involved 
in collagen type I folding and maturation. Our studies in Jurkat and K562 cells revealed that PPIB 
  15 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
is the major target of SfA in live cells, which induces the secretion of PPIB into the extracellular 
space and depletes intracellular PPIB. Depletion of PPIB is reminiscent of a PPIB knockdown. 
Knockdown of proteins is an emerging therapeutic modality that has been achieved by preventing 
protein  expression  with  siRNA  or  promoting  protein  degradation  through  targeted  protein 
degradation and is achieved through a third mechanism of secretion here. Comparison of SfA and 
SfA-mc, an analog with reduced immunosuppressive effects that similarly induces PPIB secretion, 
indicates that PPIB secretion can be separated from the immunosuppressive effects of SfA in 
Jurkat or K562 cells. 
Given the importance of PPIB in collagen type I folding and maturation, we hypothesized 
that SfA might affect collagen maturation in fibroblasts. Consistent with our proposed mechanism, 
we showed that SfA treatment reduces collagen type I levels in TGF-β1–activated myofibroblasts 
by promoting secretion of PPIB into the extracellular space. These results translated to a mouse 
model of bleomycin-induced skin and lung fibrosis, where therapeutic SfA treatment (10 mg/kg 
daily) resulted in reduced fibrosis as determined by histological and biochemical measures. 
Importantly, PPIB levels in lung tissue were drastically reduced with SfA treatment, supporting in 
vivo translation of the mechanism observed in vitro. SfA additionally dampened the innate immune 
response as indicated by reduced monocyte infiltration, suggesting a dual mechanism acting both 
on collagen maturation, through induction of PPIB secretion, and on the innate immune response 
by yet unknown mechanisms. Further, in PCLSs and fibroblasts isolated from patients with IPF, 
SfA treatment reduced collagen secretion, suggesting that the effects observed in the mouse model 
are translatable to IPF, a human disease sorely in need of additional treatments.  
From a translational perspective an important future direction is to evaluate whether 
compounds without immunosuppressive activity, such as nonimmunosuppressive SfA and CsA 
  16 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
analogs,61 are preferable for anti-fibrotic applications. Our data shows that SfA has both anti-
inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects of SfA in a preclinical mouse model, which may be 
separable  as  shown  with  SfA-mc.  Therapeutic  targeting  of  cyclophilins  by  non-
immunosuppressive analogs derived from SfA and CsA, previously developed as anti-virals,61 has 
been shown to have anti-fibrotic effects in the CCl  model of liver fibrosis and in a mouse model 
4
of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).62,63 In this regard, a novel non-immunosuppressive pan-
cyclophilin inhibitor CRV431 (Rencofilstat), a CsA analog that is described as pan PPIA, PPIB, 
PPIF,  and  PPIG  inhibitor,  has  been  recently  entered  into  clinical  development.  Hepion 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc has recently shown that rencofilstat is safe in a Phase I human trial and is 
planning to test its anti-fibrotic effects in a Phase 2B trial in NASH (ASCEND: HEPA-CRV431-
207). SfA shows promising activity in vivo and further structure-activity relationship studies in 
addition to SfA-mc may yield optimized molecules. 
Additionally, SfA is a pan-cyclophilin inhibitor and therefore a role for other PPIases in 
the overall mechanism of action of SfA cannot be completely excluded without the development 
of more selective SfA analogs. Nonetheless, our studies demonstrate the role of PPIB in regulating 
collagen type I synthesis by myofibroblasts during the development of lung and skin fibrosis in 
vivo. This mechanism is partly supported by genetic studies demonstrating reduced collagen type 
I  crosslinking  in  PPIB-deficient  mice,  which  also  develop  features  of  osteogenesis 
imperfecta.42,43,64,65 Notably, though excessive TGF-β1 signaling is a common mechanism in these 
mouse models of osteogenesis imperfecta, these mice do not develop organ fibrosis,66 which is 
consistent with the notion that PPIB may be required for TGF-β1 signaling to initiate the 
development of fibrosis. By contrast, studies with the SfA-derived pan-cyclophilin inhibitor GS-
642362, which targets PPIA, PPIB, and PPIF, in the unilateral ureteric obstruction (UUO) mouse 
  17 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
model showed inhibition of renal fibrosis by preventing tubular epithelial cell death and neutrophil 
infiltration.67 PPIB-deficient mice are viable and partially protected from inflammation in the UUO 
model at day 7, although fibrosis was not assessed at later time points,68 while efforts with PPIA-
deficient mice show reduced inflammation in the bilateral renal ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) 
model but are not protected from renal fibrosis in the UUO model, suggesting that PPIA regulates 
inflammation, but not fibrosis.69 Furthermore, PPIF-deficient mice showed protection from renal 
fibrosis in the UUO model due to reduction in tubular epithelial cell apoptosis70 and TGF-β1–
induced collagen type I expression in fibroblasts isolated from these mice was comparable to that 
observed in wild-type fibroblasts, suggesting PPIF does not play a direct role in fibrogenic 
responses. Further studies aided by the development of more selective PPIB inhibitors are needed 
to elucidate the molecular underpinnings linking PPIB, TGF-β1, and organ fibrosis in vivo. A 
strategy  to  generate  isoform-selective  cyclophilin  inhibitors  was  recently  demonstrated  by 
engineering macrocycle scaffolds.71 Our studies indicate that PPIB is a novel anti-fibrotic target 
and motivates future optimization of compounds to selectively target PPIB in collagen type I 
production. 
In summary, our work shows that the immunosuppressive natural product SfA exerts anti-
fibrotic effects by depleting intracellular PPIB, interfering with collagen maturation and reversing 
bleomycin-induced skin and lung fibrosis in a mouse model. This mechanism represents a novel 
strategy for treating organ fibrosis by interfering with collagen type I maturation in myofibroblasts. 
We uncovered this mechanism through profiling of SfA targets by PAL and chemical proteomics, 
which demonstrated that PPIB is the major cellular target of SfA and revealed that SfA induces 
PPIB secretion. Incorporation of drugs acting through this novel mechanism into the currently 
  18 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
paltry arsenal of anti-fibrotic drugs has the potential to usher in an era of improved outcomes for 
patients suffering from fibrosis. 
 
 
Data availability: Proteomics data have been deposited in the PRIDE repository under identifiers 
PXD029540, PXD029541, and PXD031010.  
Author contributions: H.A.F., M.C., H.H., F.K., and R.T.L. performed experiments and analyzed 
data. C.C. synthesized compounds. K.E.B. provided samples of primary tissue. C.M.W. 
and D.L. supervised the study. H.A.F., C.M.W., and D.L. wrote the manuscript with input 
from other authors. 
Acknowledgements:  We  thank  S.  Trager,  B.  Budnik,  and  R.  Robinson  from  the  Harvard 
University Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Resource Laboratory for technical support. 
Sanglifehrin A was a generous gift from Novartis. 
Funding: Support from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award at the Scientific Interface 
(CMW), Sloan Research Foundation (CMW), Camille–Dreyfus Foundation (CMW), and 
National  Science  Foundation  (HAF)  are  gratefully  acknowledged.  D.L.  gratefully 
acknowledges funding support from the NIH (grant R01 HL147059–01).  
Disclosures:  D.L.  has  a  financial  interest  in  Mediar  Therapeutics  and  Zenon  Biotech.  The 
companies are developing treatments for organ fibrosis. D.L.'s interests were reviewed and 
are managed by MGH and Partners HealthCare in accordance with their conflict-of-interest 
policies. All other co-authors declare no conflict of interest. 
  19 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figures 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Development of pSfA probes for target identification from live cells. a, Structures 
of SfA, pSfA1, and pSfA2. b, Summary of MTT assay results (n = 3) and binding affinities for 
PPIA and PPIB determined by TR-FRET (n = 2). c, Summary of significantly enriched (fold 
change > 1, p < 0.05) proteins identified by proteomics following treatment with 10 µM pSfA1 or 
pSfA2, with and without competition with 10x SfA (100 µM), or the minimalist tag alone (10 µM), 
in Jurkat or K562 cells treated for 30 min prior to photo-affinity labeling (n = 3). * n = 2, due to 
loss of one sample in the comparison of pSfA1/competition. Inset: Example volcano plot showing 
significant and competitive enrichment of PPIB by pSfA2. d, Western blot for PPIA and PPIB 
after enrichment of pSfA1- or pSfA2-labeled proteins from Jurkat or K562 cells. e, In vitro labeling 
of  recombinant  GST-PPIA  and  GST-PPIB  with  pSfA  probes  visualized  by  attachment  of 
Azidefluor488 and in-gel fluorescence. 
  20 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
   
 
 
Figure 2: SfA induces secretion of PPIB from cells. a, Western blot of intracellular and 
extracellular PPIB in Jurkat cells treated with 1 µM SfA or 1 µM CsA for 4 h ± 10.6 µM brefeldin 
A. b, Immunofluorescence imaging of PPIB and PDI in HeLa cells treated with 1 µM SfA or 1 
µM CsA for 4 h. Scale bars shown (20 µm). c, Volcano plot of proteins secreted by Jurkat cells 
following treatment with 1 µM SfA for 4 h relative to vehicle (n = 3). d, Volcano plot of proteins 
secreted by Jurkat cells following treatment with 1 µM CsA for 4 h relative to vehicle (n = 3). e, 
Structure of sanglifehrin macrocycle (SfA-mc). f, Summary of MTT assay results (n = 3) and PPIA 
and PPIB binding affinities, determined by TR-FRET (n = 2), for SfA-mc. g, Western blot of 
intracellular PPIB in Jurkat cells treated with 1 µM SfA or 1 µM SfA-mc for 4 h ± 10.6 µM 
brefeldin A. h, Western blot of Jurkat cell lysates for ER stress markers after treatment with 1 µM 
SfA or 1 µM SfA-mc with or without brefeldin A for 24 h (n = 3). 
  21 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
  
 
  22 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 3: SfA reduces collagen production in an IMR-90 fibroblast model of fibrosis. a, 
Schematic of proposed mechanism of action of SfA in myofibroblasts after TGF-β1–activation. b, 
Secretomics of myofibroblasts treated with SfA. Collagens are highlighted in blue; PPIB is 
highlighted in red (n = 3). c, Western blot for PPIB in conditioned media analyzed in b. d, Western 
blot for intracellular collagen (COL1A1) following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM 
SfA for 96 h (n = 3). Fold change was calculated by densitometry. e, Sircol assay for intracellular 
collagen following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA for 96 h (n = 3). f, Western 
blot for extracellular collagen (COL1A1) following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM 
SfA for 96 h (n = 3). Fold change was calculated by densitometry. Conditioned media was derived 
from samples in panel d. g, Sircol assay measuring extracellular collagen following stimulation 
with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA for 96 h (n = 3). h, Intracellular collagen visualized by sircol 
staining following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA for 96 h. i, Analysis of 
COL1A1 gene expression following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA for 96 h (n 
= 3). j, Analysis of αSMA gene expression following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM 
SfA for 96 h (n = 3). k, Western blot for cellular proteins associated with myofibroblast activation 
following stimulation with 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA for 96 h. l, Survival as determined by 
trypan blue staining following treatment with the indicated compounds for 96 h in serum-free 
media. All graphed data represents means ± standard deviation (SD). Significance was determined 
by one-way ANOVA followed by pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple comparisons using 
the Šidák correction. ns = not significant, * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001, **** = p < 
0.0001. 
 
  23 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Figure 4: SfA reduces fibrosis and immune activation in a mouse model of bleomycin-
induced skin fibrosis. a, Schematic of experimental procedure. b, Representative images of skin 
sections stained with picrosirius red to visualize collagen. Scale bar shown (100 µm). c, Dermal 
thickness, as determined by measuring distance between the epidermal–dermal junction and the 
dermal–fat  junction  (n  =  6).  d,  Collagen  content  in  skin-punch  samples,  as  determined  by 
hydroxyproline assay (n = 6). e, Characterization of immune cells in skin biopsy samples. All 
graphed data represents means ± SD (n = 4–6). c and d were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA 
followed by pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple comparisons using the Turkey correction. 
e was analyzed using one-way ANOVA followed by pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple 
comparisons using the Šidák correction. ns = not significant, * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p 
< 0.001, **** = p < 0.0001. 
   
  24 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Figure 5: SfA reduces fibrosis and immune activation in a mouse model of bleomycin-
induced lung fibrosis. a, Schematic of experimental procedure. b, Representative images of lung 
sections stained with picrosirius red to visualize collagen. Scale bar shown (100 µm). c, Collagen 
  25 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
content in left lungs, as determined by hydroxyproline assay (n = 5–8). d, Vascular leak assay, as 
determined by BCA assay for protein content in bronchioalveolar lavage (BAL) supernatant (n = 
6). e, Characterization of immune cells in BAL (n = 4–8). f, Western blot for PPIA and PPIB in 
lung cell lysates (n = 3). g. Generation of fibrotic precision cut lung slices (PCLS) from transgenic 
collagen-GFP reporter mice (Col-GFP) at day 14 post-bleomycin challenge. PCLS were treated 
with or without SfA (1 µm) for 2 days (n = 3). Collagen type I protein and mRNA levels were 
assessed in GFP– cells and GFP+ fibroblasts sorted by FACS from PCLS by Western blot (h) and 
real time PCR (i), respectively (n = 3). Secreted collagen type I was assessed in PCLS supernatants 
by sircol assay (j) (n = 3). All graphed data represents means ± SD. c, d, f, h, i and j were analyzed 
using one-way ANOVA followed by pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple comparisons 
using the Šidák correction. e was analyzed using a two-way ANOVA followed by pairwise 
comparisons corrected for multiple comparisons using the Turkey correction. ns = not significant, 
* = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001, **** = p < 0.0001. 
 
   
  26 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Figure 6: SfA reduces collagen secretion from primary fibrotic fibroblasts. a, Generation of 
precision cut lung slices (PCLS) from explanted lung tissue isolated from patients with idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Lung tissue was obtained in 1 cm blocks (a), then sliced (200–300 µm 
thick) using a Compresstome® VF-310-0Z (b). PCLSs were then treated with or without SfA (1 
µM) for 72 h in culture (n = 4) (c). (d–g) Analysis of collagen and PPIB secretion from PCLSs 
prepared from IPF patient lung tissue ± 1 µM SfA in supernatants (n = 4). h, Western blot for 
collagen type I secreted by primary human fibroblasts isolated from healthy controls and IPF 
patients ± 1 µM SfA over 96 h in cell supernatants. i, Western blot for α-smooth muscle actin 
(αSMA) and phosphoSMAD3/SMAD3 signaling in IPF fibroblasts ± SfA over 96 h in cell lysates. 
GAPDH was used as loading control. d–g was analyzed with a one-sample t-test against a 
hypothetical value of 1. 
 
   
  27 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 1: Model of SfA and analogs pSFA1 or pSFA2 overlaid on PPIA and 
PPIB. a, Crystal structure of the SfA–PPIA complex (green, PDB: 1YND) aligned with PPIB 
(blue, PDB: 3ICI). b, Model of pSfA1 overlaid on PPIA and PPIB. c, Model of pSfA2 overlaid on 
PPIA (green) and PPIB (blue). Photo-affinity tag highlighted in yellow. Models of pSfA1 and 
pSfA2 were derived from SfA and the chemical modification was minimized in Molecular 
Operating Environment 2020. 
 
  28 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 2: Effect of indicated compounds on Jurkat (a), K562 (b), and A549 (c) 
cell viability, as determined in a 72 h MTT assay (n = 3). MTT data is shown as means ± SD, with 
3 replicates per condition. 
 
  29 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 3: Determination of dissociation constants for SfA, pSfA1, pSfA2, and 
SfA-mc to PPIA (a) and PPIB (b), using a standard protocol performed by Eurofins (n = 2). 
Dissociation constants were determined relative to CsA in a competitive TR-FRET assay, with 
each compound assayed over a concentration range of 0.01 nM–10 µM.  
 
  30 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 4: Photo-affinity labeling with sanglifehrin analogs and chemical 
proteomics analysis. a, Volcano plots of chemoproteomics data from Jurkat cells (n = 3). PPIB is 
marked in red on each plot. PPIA is marked in green in ratios where it was significantly enriched. 
* n = 2, due to loss of one sample in the comparison of pSfA1/competition. b, Volcano plots of 
chemoproteomics data from K562 cells (n = 3). PPIB is marked in red on each plot. PPIA is marked 
in green in ratios where it was significantly enriched. c, Structure of the minimalist tag used as a 
negative control in chemoproteomics experiments. d, Western blot of enrichment of IMPDH2 with 
pSfA1 and pSfA2 from Jurkat and K562 cells. 
 
  31 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 5: Boxplot of protein level normalization using TMT. Normalization 
was performed against the total peptide amount in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. 
 
 
   
  32 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
Extended Data Figure 6: Comparison of SfA, CsA, and SfA-mc on PPIB levels and cell 
viability. a, Western blot of intracellular PPIB in Jurkat cells treated with 1 µM SfA or 1 µM CsA 
for the indicated time. b, Western blot of intracellular PPIB in Jurkat cells pretreated with the 
indicated inhibitors for 1 h prior to treatment with 1 µM SfA for 4 h. c, Activity of SfA and SfA-
mc in a 72 h MTT assay in Jurkat cells. SfA data is replicated from Extended Data Figure 2a (n = 
3). d, Activity of SfA and SfA-mc in a 72 h MTT assay in K562 cells (n = 3). SfA data is replicated 
from Extended Data Figure 2b (n = 3). MTT data is shown as means ± SD, with 3 replicates per 
condition. 
 
 
  33 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
  
 
Extended Data Figure 7: SfA-mc reduces collagen production in an IMR-90 fibroblast model 
of fibrosis. a, Intracellular collagen visualized by sircol staining following stimulation with 10 
ng/mL TGF-β1 ± 1 µM SfA-mc for 96 h. b, Survival as determined by trypan blue staining 
following treatment with the indicated compounds for 96 h in serum-free media. All graphed data 
represents means ± standard deviation (SD). Significance was determined by one-way ANOVA 
followed by pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple comparisons using the Šidák correction. 
ns = not significant, * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001, **** = p < 0.0001. 
 
 
  34 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
Extended Data Figure 8: Gating schemes for flow cytometry data. Gating schemes for data 
shown in Fig. 4e (a) and 5e (b). 
 
 
 
  35 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 1: Uncropped Western Blots related to Figure 1. 
 
 
  36 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
   
 
Supplementary Figure 2: Uncropped Western Blots related to Figure 2. 
  37 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 3: Uncropped Western Blots related to Figure 3. 
 
 
  38 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 4: Uncropped Western Blots related to Figure 5, and Figure 6. 
  39 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 5: Uncropped Western Blots related to Extended Data Figure 4 and 
Extended Data Figure 6. 
 
 
 
  40 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
References 
1  Hinz, B. & Lagares, D. Evasion of apoptosis by myofibroblasts: a hallmark of fibrotic 
diseases. Nat Rev Rheumatol 16, 11-31 (2020). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41584-019-0324-
5 
2  Gilbane, A. J., Denton, C. P. & Holmes, A. M. Scleroderma pathogenesis: a pivotal role 
for fibroblasts as effector cells. Arthritis Research & Therapy 15 (2013). 
https://doi.org:ARTN 215 
10.1186/ar4230 
3  Scotton, C. J. & Chambers, R. C. Molecular targets in pulmonary fibrosis: the 
myofibroblast in focus. Chest 132, 1311-1321 (2007). https://doi.org:10.1378/chest.06-
2568 
4  Brenner, D. A. et al. Origin of myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis. Fibrogenesis Tissue 
Repair 5, S17 (2012). https://doi.org:10.1186/1755-1536-5-S1-S17 
5  Wynn, T. A. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis. J Pathol 214, 199-210 
(2008). https://doi.org:10.1002/path.2277 
6  Meran, S. & Steadman, R. Fibroblasts and myofibroblasts in renal fibrosis. Int J Exp 
Pathol 92, 158-167 (2011). https://doi.org:10.1111/j.1365-2613.2011.00764.x 
7  Ho, Y. Y., Lagares, D., Tager, A. M. & Kapoor, M. Fibrosis--a lethal component of 
systemic sclerosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 10, 390-402 (2014). 
https://doi.org:10.1038/nrrheum.2014.53 
8  Volkmann, E. R. & Varga, J. Emerging targets of disease-modifying therapy for systemic 
sclerosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 15, 208-224 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41584-019-
0184-z 
9  Merkt, W., Bueno, M., Mora, A. L. & Lagares, D. Senotherapeutics: Targeting 
senescence in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Semin Cell Dev Biol 101, 104-110 (2020). 
https://doi.org:10.1016/j.semcdb.2019.12.008 
10  Cox, T. R. & Erler, J. T. Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix: 
implications for fibrotic diseases and cancer. Dis Model Mech 4, 165-178 (2011). 
https://doi.org:10.1242/dmm.004077 
11  Herrera, J., Henke, C. A. & Bitterman, P. B. Extracellular matrix as a driver of 
progressive fibrosis. J Clin Invest 128, 45-53 (2018). https://doi.org:10.1172/JCI93557 
12  Kania, G., Rudnik, M. & Distler, O. Involvement of the myeloid cell compartment in 
fibrogenesis and systemic sclerosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 15, 288-302 (2019). 
https://doi.org:10.1038/s41584-019-0212-z 
13  Distler, J. H. W. et al. Shared and distinct mechanisms of fibrosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 15, 
705-730 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41584-019-0322-7 
14  King, T. E. et al. Effect of interferon gamma-1b on survival in patients with idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis (INSPIRE): a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. The 
Lancet 374, 222-228 (2009). https://doi.org:10.1016/s0140-6736(09)60551-1 
15  Raghu, G. et al. Treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis with etanercept: an 
exploratory, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 178, 948-955 (2008). 
https://doi.org:10.1164/rccm.200709-1446OC 
16  Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Clinical Research, N. et al. Prednisone, azathioprine, and 
N-acetylcysteine for pulmonary fibrosis. N Engl J Med 366, 1968-1977 (2012). 
https://doi.org:10.1056/NEJMoa1113354 
  41 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
17  Selvaggio, A. S. & Noble, P. W. Pirfenidone Initiates a New Era in the Treatment of 
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis. Annu Rev Med 67, 487-495 (2016). 
https://doi.org:10.1146/annurev-med-120214-013614 
18  Wollin, L. et al. Mode of action of nintedanib in the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis. Eur Respir J 45, 1434-1445 (2015). https://doi.org:10.1183/09031936.00174914 
19  Karimi-Shah, B. A. & Chowdhury, B. A. Forced vital capacity in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis--FDA review of pirfenidone and nintedanib. N Engl J Med 372, 1189-1191 
(2015). https://doi.org:10.1056/NEJMp1500526 
20  Food and Drug Administration.     (2020). 
21  Food and Drug Administration.     (2020). 
22  Sgalla, G., Lerede, M. & Richeldi, L. Emerging drugs for the treatment of idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis: 2020 phase II clinical trials. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs 26, 93-101 
(2021). https://doi.org:10.1080/14728214.2021.1931119 
23  Sgalla, G., Lerede, M. & Richeldi, L. Phase three clinical trials in idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis. Expert Opinion on Orphan Drugs 9, 1-11 (2021). 
https://doi.org:10.1080/21678707.2021.1882299 
24  Smith, E. & Collins, I. Photoaffinity labeling in target- and binding-site identification. 
Future Med Chem 7, 159-183 (2015). https://doi.org:10.4155/fmc.14.152 
25  Flaxman, H. A. & Woo, C. M. Mapping the Small Molecule Interactome by Mass 
Spectrometry. Biochemistry 57, 186-193 (2018). 
https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.biochem.7b01038 
26  Burton, N. R., Kim, P. & Backus, K. M. Photoaffinity labelling strategies for mapping 
the small molecule-protein interactome. Org Biomol Chem 19, 7792-7809 (2021). 
https://doi.org:10.1039/d1ob01353j 
27  Miyamoto, D. K., Flaxman, H. A., Wu, H. Y., Gao, J. & Woo, C. M. Discovery of a 
Celecoxib Binding Site on Prostaglandin E Synthase (PTGES) with a Cleavable 
Chelation-Assisted Biotin Probe. ACS Chem Biol 14, 2527-2532 (2019). 
https://doi.org:10.1021/acschembio.9b00511 
28  Fehr, T., Kallen, J., Oberer, L., Sanglier, J. J. & Schilling, W. Sanglifehrins A, B, C and 
D, novel cyclophilin-binding compounds isolated from Streptomyces sp. A92-308110. II. 
Structure elucidation, stereochemistry and physico-chemical properties. J Antibiot 
(Tokyo) 52, 474-479 (1999).  
29  Sanglier, J. J. et al. Sanglifehrins A, B, C and D, novel cyclophilin-binding compounds 
isolated from Streptomyces sp. A92-308110. I. Taxonomy, fermentation, isolation and 
biological activity. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 52, 466-473 (1999).  
30  Hultsch, T., Albers, M. W., Schreiber, S. L. & Hohman, R. J. Immunophilin ligands 
demonstrate common features of signal transduction leading to exocytosis or 
transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88, 6229-6233 (1991). 
https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.88.14.6229 
31  Liu, J. et al. Calcineurin is a common target of cyclophilin-cyclosporin A and FKBP-
FK506 complexes. Cell 66, 807-815 (1991). https://doi.org:10.1016/0092-
8674(91)90124-h 
32  Fruman, D. A., Klee, C. B., Bierer, B. E. & Burakoff, S. J. Calcineurin phosphatase 
activity in T lymphocytes is inhibited by FK 506 and cyclosporin A. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 89, 3686-3690 (1992).  
  42 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
33  Swanson, S. K. et al. Cyclosporin-mediated inhibition of bovine calcineurin by 
cyclophilins A and B. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89, 3741-3745 (1992). 
https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.89.9.3741 
34  Zenke, G. et al. Sanglifehrin A, a novel cyclophilin-binding compound showing 
immunosuppressive activity with a new mechanism of action. J Immunol 166, 7165-7171 
(2001).  
35  Zhang, L. H. & Liu, J. O. Sanglifehrin A, a novel cyclophilin-binding 
immunosuppressant, inhibits IL-2-dependent T cell proliferation at the G1 phase of the 
cell cycle. Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950) 166, 5611-5618 (2001). 
https://doi.org:10.4049/jimmunol.166.9.5611 
36  Zhang, L. H., Youn, H. D. & Liu, J. O. Inhibition of Cell Cycle Progression by the Novel 
Cyclophilin Ligand Sanglifehrin A Is Mediated through the NF B-dependent Activation 
of p53. Journal of Biological Chemistry 276, 43534-43540 (2001). 
https://doi.org:10.1074/jbc.M104257200 
37  Pua, K. H., Stiles, D. T., Sowa, M. E. & Verdine, G. L. IMPDH2 Is an Intracellular 
Target of the Cyclophilin A and Sanglifehrin A Complex. Cell Rep 18, 432-442 (2017). 
https://doi.org:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.030 
38  Chang, C. F., Flaxman, H. A. & Woo, C. M. Enantioselective Synthesis and Biological 
Evaluation of Sanglifehrin A and B and Analogs. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 60, 17045-
17052 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1002/anie.202103022 
39  Price, E. R. et al. Human cyclophilin B: a second cyclophilin gene encodes a peptidyl-
prolyl isomerase with a signal sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88, 1903-1907 (1991). 
https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.88.5.1903 
40  Arber, S., Krause, K. H. & Caroni, P. s-cyclophilin is retained intracellularly via a unique 
COOH-terminal sequence and colocalizes with the calcium storage protein calreticulin. J 
Cell Biol 116, 113-125 (1992). https://doi.org:10.1083/jcb.116.1.113 
41  Marini, J. C., Cabral, W. A., Barnes, A. M. & Chang, W. Components of the collagen 
prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex are crucial for normal bone development. Cell Cycle 6, 
1675-1681 (2007). https://doi.org:10.4161/cc.6.14.4474 
42  Cabral, W. A. et al. Abnormal type I collagen post-translational modification and 
crosslinking in a cyclophilin B KO mouse model of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta. 
PLoS Genet 10, e1004465 (2014). https://doi.org:10.1371/journal.pgen.1004465 
43  Terajima, M. et al. Cyclophilin-B Modulates Collagen Cross-linking by Differentially 
Affecting Lysine Hydroxylation in the Helical and Telopeptidyl Domains of Tendon 
Type I Collagen. J Biol Chem 291, 9501-9512 (2016). 
https://doi.org:10.1074/jbc.M115.699470 
44  Li, Z. et al. Design and Synthesis of Minimalist Terminal Alkyne-Containing Diazirine 
Photo-Crosslinkers and Their Incorporation into Kinase Inhibitors for Cell- and Tissue-
Based Proteome Profiling. Angew Chem Int Ed 52, 8551-8556 (2013). 
https://doi.org:10.1002/anie.201300683 
45  Kallen, J., Sedrani, R., Zenke, G. & Wagner, J. Structure of human cyclophilin A in 
complex with the novel immunosuppressant sanglifehrin A at 1.6 A resolution. J Biol 
Chem 280, 21965-21971 (2005). https://doi.org:10.1074/jbc.M501623200 
46  Gregory, M. A. et al. Preclinical characterization of naturally occurring polyketide 
cyclophilin inhibitors from the sanglifehrin family. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 55, 
1975-1981 (2011). https://doi.org:10.1128/aac.01627-10 
  43 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
47  West, A. V. et al. Labeling Preferences of Diazirines with Protein Biomolecules. J Am 
Chem Soc 143, 6691-6700 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1021/jacs.1c02509 
48  Price, E. R. et al. Cyclophilin B trafficking through the secretory pathway is altered by 
binding of cyclosporin A. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91, 3931-3935 (1994). 
https://doi.org:10.1073/pnas.91.9.3931 
49  Sedrani, R. et al. Sanglifehrin-cyclophilin interaction: degradation work, synthetic 
macrocyclic analogues, X-ray crystal structure, and binding data. J Am Chem Soc 125, 
3849-3859 (2003). https://doi.org:10.1021/ja021327y 
50  Meng, X. M., Nikolic-Paterson, D. J. & Lan, H. Y. TGF-beta: the master regulator of 
fibrosis. Nat Rev Nephrol 12, 325-338 (2016). https://doi.org:10.1038/nrneph.2016.48 
51  Varga, J. & Pasche, B. Transforming growth factor beta as a therapeutic target in 
systemic sclerosis. Nat Rev Rheumatol 5, 200-206 (2009). 
https://doi.org:10.1038/nrrheum.2009.26 
52  Hinz, B. Myofibroblasts. Exp Eye Res 142, 56-70 (2016). 
https://doi.org:10.1016/j.exer.2015.07.009 
53  Lagares, D. et al. Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase prevents experimental lung fibrosis 
and myofibroblast formation. Arthritis & Rheumatism 64, 1653-1664 (2012). 
https://doi.org:10.1002/art.33482 
54  Lagares, D. et al. Endothelin 1 contributes to the effect of transforming growth factor 
beta1 on wound repair and skin fibrosis. Arthritis Rheum 62, 878-889 (2010). 
https://doi.org:10.1002/art.27307 
55  Lagares, D. & Hinz, B. Animal and Human Models of Tissue Repair and Fibrosis: An 
Introduction. Methods Mol Biol 2299, 277-290 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1007/978-1-
0716-1382-5_20 
56  Lagares, D. et al. Targeted apoptosis of myofibroblasts with the BH3 mimetic ABT-263 
reverses established fibrosis. Sci Transl Med 9 (2017). 
https://doi.org:10.1126/scitranslmed.aal3765 
57  Rius Rigau, A., Luber, M. & Distler, J. H. W. Mouse Models of Skin Fibrosis. Methods 
Mol Biol 2299, 371-383 (2021). https://doi.org:10.1007/978-1-0716-1382-5_25 
58  Moore, B. B. et al. Animal models of fibrotic lung disease. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 49, 
167-179 (2013). https://doi.org:10.1165/rcmb.2013-0094TR 
59  Liu, G. et al. Use of precision cut lung slices as a translational model for the study of 
lung biology. Respir Res 20, 162 (2019). https://doi.org:10.1186/s12931-019-1131-x 
60  Alsafadi, H. N. et al. An ex vivo model to induce early fibrosis-like changes in human 
precision-cut lung slices. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 312, L896-L902 (2017). 
https://doi.org:10.1152/ajplung.00084.2017 
61  Sweeney, Z. K., Fu, J. & Wiedmann, B. From chemical tools to clinical medicines: 
nonimmunosuppressive cyclophilin inhibitors derived from the cyclosporin and 
sanglifehrin scaffolds. J Med Chem 57, 7145-7159 (2014). 
https://doi.org:10.1021/jm500223x 
62  Simon Serrano, S. et al. Evaluation of NV556, a Novel Cyclophilin Inhibitor, as a 
Potential Antifibrotic Compound for Liver Fibrosis. Cells 8 (2019). 
https://doi.org:10.3390/cells8111409 
63  Kuo, J. et al. A Pan-Cyclophilin Inhibitor, CRV431, Decreases Fibrosis and Tumor 
Development in Chronic Liver Disease Models. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 371, 231-241 
(2019). https://doi.org:10.1124/jpet.119.261099 
  44 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531890; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
64  Ishikawa, Y., Mizuno, K. & Bachinger, H. P. Ziploc-ing the structure 2.0: Endoplasmic 
reticulum-resident peptidyl prolyl isomerases show different activities toward 
hydroxyproline. J Biol Chem 292, 9273-9282 (2017). 
https://doi.org:10.1074/jbc.M116.772657 
65  Choi, J. W. et al. Severe osteogenesis imperfecta in cyclophilin B-deficient mice. PLoS 
Genet 5, e1000750 (2009). https://doi.org:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000750 
66  Grafe, I. et al. Excessive transforming growth factor-beta signaling is a common 
mechanism in osteogenesis imperfecta. Nat Med 20, 670-675 (2014). 
https://doi.org:10.1038/nm.3544 
67  Leong, K. G. et al. Cyclophilin Inhibition Protects Against Experimental Acute Kidney 
Injury and Renal Interstitial Fibrosis. Int J Mol Sci 22 (2020). 
https://doi.org:10.3390/ijms22010271 
68  Sarró, E. et al. Cyclophilins A and B oppositely regulate renal tubular epithelial cell 
phenotype. Journal of Molecular Cell Biology 12, 499-514 (2020). 
https://doi.org:10.1093/jmcb/mjaa005 
69  Leong, K. G., Ozols, E., Kanellis, J., Nikolic-Paterson, D. J. & Ma, F. Y. Cyclophilin A 
Promotes Inflammation in Acute Kidney Injury but Not in Renal Fibrosis. Int J Mol Sci 
21 (2020). https://doi.org:10.3390/ijms21103667 
70  Hou, W. et al. Cyclophilin D promotes tubular cell damage and the development of 
interstitial fibrosis in the obstructed kidney. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 45, 250-260 
(2018). https://doi.org:10.1111/1440-1681.12881 
71  Peterson, A. A. et al. Discovery and molecular basis of subtype-selective cyclophilin 
inhibitors. Nat Chem Biol (2022). https://doi.org:10.1038/s41589-022-01116-1 
 
 
  45 

NEW PAGE