bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Title 
The CGG triplet repeat binding protein 1 counteracts DNA secondary structure-induced 
transcription-replication conflicts 
 
Authors 
Henning Ummethum1, Maxime Lalonde1, Marcel Werner1, Manuel Trauner1, Anna Chanou1, 
β
Matthias Wei 1, Clare S. K. Lee1, Elisabeth Kruse1, Andreas Ettinger2, Stephan Hamperl1,3* 
 
Author list footnotes 
1) Chromosome dynamics and genome stability, Institute of Epigenetics and Stem Cells, 
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 21, 81377 München, Germany 
2) Microscopy core, Institute of Epigenetics and Stem Cells, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 
Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 21, 81377 München, Germany 
3) Lead Contact  
* Correspondence: stephan.hamperl@helmholtz-muenchen.de 
 
Keywords (9/10) 
CGG-trinucleotide repeats, CGGBP1, G-quadruplex structure, R-loop structure, Transcription 
Regulation, Transcription-Replication Conflicts, Replication Stress, Genomic Instability, DNA 
damage   
   
1 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Summary 
Short tracts of trinucleotide repeats with less than 10 repeats are found frequently throughout the 
genome  without  any  apparent  negative  impact  on  DNA  replication  fork  progression  or 
transcription elongation. CGG binding protein 1 (CGGBP1) binds to CGG triplet repeats and has 
been implicated in multiple cellular processes such as transcription, replication and DNA damage. 
Here, we show that CGGBP1 binds to human gene promoter sites prone to G-quadruplex and 
R-loop secondary structure formation. Altering CGGBP1 levels results in the accumulation of 
R-loops  and  causes  a  defect  in  transcriptional  elongation  by  RNA  polymerase  II,  which 
subsequently leads to replication fork stalling and transcription-replication conflicts. Together, our 
work  shows  that  short trinucleotide  repeats  are a  source  of  genome-destabilizing  secondary 
structures and cells rely on specific DNA-binding factors to maintain proper transcription and 
replication progression at short trinucleotide repeats. 
 
   
2 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Introduction 
Secondary DNA structures arising in the genome as a result of transcription and replication can 
be a threat to genome stability (Aguilera and Gaillard, 2014; Chang et al., 2017; French, 1992; Fu 
et al., 2011; Hamperl et al., 2017; Promonet et al., 2020; Sankar et al., 2016; Srivatsan et al., 
2010; Tuduri et al., 2009; Urban et al., 2016). Both transcription and replication proceed by 
unwinding the template DNA, thereby creating single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and potentially 
(cid:2)
allowing stable secondary DNA structures such as hairpins, cruciforms, triplexes (H DNA) and 
(cid:2)
G quadruplexes (G4s) to form. Tracts of repetitive sequences such as CGG-trinucleotide repeats 
are particularly prone to secondary structure formation. The formation of secondary structures 
'
can lead to the expansion of CGG repeats, for example in the 5 untranslated region (UTR) of the 
human Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1 (FMR1) gene (Zhao and Usdin, 2016), which is 
observed in the human neurodegenerative disease Fragile X syndrome (FXS) (Verkerk et al., 
1991). When the CGG expansion exceeds 200 repeats they become hypermethylated, causing 
transcriptional silencing of the FMR1 gene. This results in the loss of its encoded protein FMRP, 
which  is  a  selective  RNA-binding  protein  implicated  in  many  cellular  functions  such  as 
regulating dendritic mRNA transport, local protein synthesis at synapses (Feng et al., 1997; Fu et 
al., 1991; Pieretti et al., 1991) among many others (reviewed in Davis and Broadie, 2017). 
(cid:2)
Disease-length repetitive CGG-tracts are prone to form R loops (Groh et al., 2014; Loomis et 
al., 2014), These RNA:DNA hybrids form when nascent transcripts reanneal to their template 
DNA, displacing the non-template strand as ssDNA. R-loop formation occurs co-transcriptionally 
and  has  been  proposed  to  impact  both  transcription  and  replication  by  reducing  RNAPII 
elongation and hindering replication fork progression. Despite the clinically relevant example of 
CGG-trinucleotide repeat expansion at the FMR1 gene, short trinucleotide repeat tracts with n < 
10 are extensively scattered across the entire genome (Clark et al., 2006; Willems et al., 2014). 
However, these short repeats are not known to impact transcription and/or replication, despite the 
ability of even (CGG)  oligonucleotides to form a stable G-quadruplex structure at physiological 
5
pH in vitro (Fry and Loeb, 1994). Further, these “normal” repeats do not significantly induce 
(cid:2)
R loops compared to longer repeats associated with FXS and are not associated with delay of 
RNAPII or transcriptional silencing (Groh et al., 2014). However, whether such short repeats are 
capable to form secondary structures in vivo or whether and how the formation of harmful G4 
and R-loops at those repeats is regulated, remains unclear.   
3 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The CGG binding protein 1 (CGGBP1) was identified as a short CGG triplet repeat binding 
protein in vitro (Deissler et al., 1996, 1997; Richards et al., 1993). CGGBP1 is a 20kDa protein 
with a nuclear localization signal and a predicted C2H2-type Zn finger DNA-binding domain 
(Müller-Hartmann et al., 2000; Singh and Westermark, 2015). Electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays with CGG-repeat containing oligonucleotides confirmed strong affinity to CGG-repeat 
sequences in vitro (Deissler et al., 1996; Müller-Hartmann et al., 2000), which has also been 
'
verified in vivo at selected loci, such as the CGG repeats in the 5 UTR of the FMR1 gene 
'
(Goracci et al., 2016). Overexpression of CGGBP1 promotes the binding onto the 5 UTR of the 
FMR1 gene leading to transcriptional repression (Müller-Hartmann et al., 2000), suggesting that 
an excess of CGGBP1-bound repeats may have a dominant negative effect on transcription 
elongation. On the other hand, CGGBP1 knockdown did not affect either FMR1 transcription 
activity in transcriptionally active alleles or CGG expansion stability in cell lines with expanded 
FMR1 CGG alleles (Goracci et al., 2016). Such a gene- and context-specific effect of CGGBP1 
levels  on transcription  regulation  was also  observed  at  other  gene promoters.  For  example, 
CGGBP1 binding at the HSF1 promoter is required both for driving basal levels of transcription 
as well as for repressing excessive levels of expression that are permitted only after heat shock 
induction (Singh et al., 2009). One possibility is that CGGBP1 has a direct regulatory effect on 
RNAPII elongation during passage of the transcription complex through CGGBP1-bound repeats, 
but the molecular details of such differential interactions have not been investigated.  
Here we first profiled CGGBP1 binding genome-wide and identified its target binding sites. We 
find that CGGBP1 is strongly enriched at short CGG tandem repeats, in particular at transcribed 
gene promoter regions. Downregulation of CGGBP1 in human U-2OS cells results in a global 
increase of transcriptional activity. Likewise, overexpression of CGGBP1 decreases global RNA 
synthesis  rates,  suggesting  that  CGGBP1  functions  as  a  global  transcriptional  repressor,  as 
previously  reported  (Singh  and  Westermark, 2015).  Interestingly, a subset of RNAPII genes 
containing  direct  binding  sites  of  CGGBP1  require  basal  levels  of  CGGBP1  for  efficient 
transcription elongation. Consistently, loss  of  CGGBP1  results  in  more  chromatin-associated 
RNAPII in S-phase, thereby causing replication fork impairment and an elevated frequency of 
transcription-replication conflicts (TRCs). Using an episomal system, we provide direct evidence 
that CGGBP1 can prevent the formation of transcription-impairing and genome-destabilizing 
R-loops. Together, these observations suggest that CGGBP1 has key functions in the regulation 
4 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
of transcription without provoking excessive formation of DNA secondary structures such as G4s 
and R-loops over short CGG tandem repeats that would otherwise become genome-destabilizing 
transcription and replication impediments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
5 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Results 
Global profiling of CGGBP1 binding sites in the human genome 
To characterize the genome-wide binding targets of CGGBP1, we first took advantage of a 
publicly available ENCODE CGGBP1 Chromatin Immunoprecipitation-Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) 
dataset in human K562 cells (The ENCODE Project Consortium, 2012). We identified a total of 
3459 CGGBP1 binding sites across two biological replicates with high confidence over the 
untagged control (Figures 1A-C). Strikingly, the majority of identified ChIP-Seq peaks (~ 90%) 
mapped  onto  non-repetitive  euchromatic  regions  with  high  gene  density,  with  a  strong 
over-representation at RNAPII-dependent promoter regions. In fact, ~73% of the peaks were found 
within 1kb genomic distance to gene promoters and more than 80% of the detected CGGBP1 peaks 
resided within 3kb distance to the nearest transcription start site (TSS) (Figures 1A-B). A small 
fraction of target genes, such as MALAT1 and RPL23A/TLCD1, displayed CGGBP1 peaks over 
the whole gene body with a preference for intronic sequences (Figures 1A-B). About 10% of all 
peaks occurred at intergenic regions distal from annotated TSSs and gene body regions (Figure 
1B). This suggests that the majority of CGGBP1 binding events occur within genic regions with a 
strong preference towards gene promoters of RNAPII-transcribed genes. 
As expected, CGGBP1-positive regions were enriched for short CGG repeats. Motif identification 
using MEME revealed three motifs containing up to four consecutive CGG repeats (Figure 1D). 
Consistent with the in vitro binding preference of CGGBP1 towards CGG repeats (Deissler et al., 
1996, 1997; Richards et al., 1993), these findings confirmed that CGGBP1 preferentially binds 
short tracts of CGG-repeats in vivo, a motif that is enriched at RNAPII-dependent promoters 
(Sawaya et al., 2013). Due to this inherent DNA sequence bias, the TSSs containing a CGGBP1 
peak showed an elevated level of GC-content and GC-skew in comparison to two matched sets of 
randomly  shuffled  control  TSSs  without  CGGBP1  peaks  (Figures  S1A-B).  Because  both 
GC-content and GC-skew are positively correlated with the formation of G4 and R-loops (Gellert 
et al., 1962; Lam et al., 2013; Sen and Gilbert, 1988; Shrestha et al., 2014), we next asked 
whether CGGBP1-bound sites show increased levels of G4 or R-loops. We used G4 Hunter to 
predict G4 structure formation in a region 1kb upstream and downstream of the TSS (Bedrat et al., 
2016). We found that CGGBP1 bound TSSs have a higher probability to form G4s within -/+100bp 
of the TSS compared to two randomly permutated controls with an equal number of TSSs (Figure 
1E). Analysis of a DRIP-Seq dataset from U2OS cells also indicated a strong increase in R-loop 
6 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
signal at CGGBP1-bound TSSs compared to control TSSs (Figure 1F). Together, these data 
suggest that CGGBP1 binding sites in the genome coincide with sites of short CGG-trinucleotide 
repeats at RNAPII promoters and show a high propensity to form G4 and R-loops. 
Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels leads to global transcriptional changes 
Given its localisation to gene promoters, we next asked whether CGGBP1 can regulate RNAPII 
transcription. We first performed siRNA-mediated knockdown of CGGBP1 using a pool of four 
independent CGGBP1-targeting siRNAs, which led to efficient depletion of CGGBP1 after 24h of 
transfection (Figure 2A). Prolonged knockdown of CGGBP1 for 48h and 72h resulted in an 
increased accumulation of cells in G1-phase (Figure 2B  and  Figure S2A), consistent with 
previous studies (Singh et al., 2011). Thus, a basal expression level of CGGBP1 is important for 
cell cycle progression. 
To investigate whether CGGBP1 regulates transcription, we pulse-labelled cells with the uridine 
analogue 5-ethynyluridine (EU), which is incorporated into newly synthesized RNA (Jao  and 
Salic,  2008).  Interestingly,  we  observed  a  significant  increase  in  transcriptional activity in 
CGGBP1-depleted cells compared to control siRNA cells (Figure 2C-D). Importantly, treatment 
β
with transcription elongation inhibitor 5,6-Dichlorobenzimidazole 1- -D-ribofuranoside (DRB), a 
specific inhibitor of RNAPII Serin-2 phosphorylation (Bensaude, 2011; Zandomeni et al., 1982), 
significantly  reduced  nuclear  EU  signal  in  both  siControl  and  siCGGBP1  cells.  However, 
CGGBP1 depleted cells maintained an elevated level of EU incorporation under conditions of 
RNAPII transcription inhibition. These data suggest that the increase in EU signal may reflect 
RNAPI or RNAPIII activity (Figure 2C-D). 
To  better  address  the  relationship  between  CGGBP1  binding  at  RNAPII  promoters  and 
transcriptional activity, we measured the expression level of three genes that contain CGGBP1 
binding sites (MOV10, MALAT1 and TLCD1, Figure 1A) and two genes without CGGBP1 
binding (UHRF1 and ZNF703) by RT-qPCR. For all three CGGBP1-bound target genes, we 
observed a strong reduction in mRNA levels in CGGBP1-depleted cells to ~40-50% compared to 
the control siRNA cells, whereas non-CGGBP1-bound genes were only mildly (ZNF703) or not 
affected (UHRF1) (Figure 2E). This suggests that CGGBP1 positively regulates its target genes.   
Furthermore, this implies that the global increase in transcriptional activity upon depletion of 
CGGBP1 (Figure 2C-D) is not related to direct CGGBP1-bound RNAPII target genes.  
7 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Next,  we  wanted  to  understand  how  overexpression  of  CGGBP1  globally  affects  nascent 
transcription levels. To this end, we transiently overexpressed HA-tagged CGGBP1, which led to 
high levels of CGGBP1 as determined using an HA-antibody (Figure 2F). We then determined EU 
incorporation rates in HA (-) and HA (+) cells with and without RNAPII transcription inhibition by 
DRB  treatment.  CGGBP1-overexpressing  cells  showed  a  significant  decrease  in  nascent 
transcription levels, suggesting that increased CGGBP1 levels negatively affect global RNA 
synthesis (Figures 2G-H). This decrease of EU incorporation of HA (+) versus HA (-) cells was 
also observed in the presence of DRB, again suggesting that this effect was not limited to RNAPII 
transcription. Importantly, the decrease in transcriptional activity was only observed in transfected 
HA (+) cells (Figure 2I), suggesting that the effects on transcriptional activity were caused by 
CGGBP1. Together, these data suggest that high levels of CGGBP1 lead to global transcriptional 
repression. Thus, a balanced level of cellular CGGBP1 levels appears to be critical for correct 
nuclear transcription rates (including all three nuclear RNA Polymerases), as knockdown and 
overexpression of CGGBP1 positively and negatively impacts transcription on a global level, 
respectively. 
Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels impacts the level of chromatin-bound RNAPII complexes 
As gene promoters are the major regulatory sites for RNAPII loading and transcription initiation 
and represent the primary target sites of CGGBP1 binding (Figure 1), we asked if and how 
CGGBP1 binding at promoters affects RNAPII occupancy on chromatin. First, we performed 
chromatin  fractionation  and  measured  the  levels  of  total  chromatin-bound  RNAPII  versus 
elongating form of RNAPII phsopho-Ser2 (RNAPII-pS2) by Western blot (Figure S3A-B). We 
observed a ~1.5-fold increase in the amount of RNAPII-pS2 on chromatin in CGGBP1-depleted 
cells compared to control knockdown cells, suggesting that CGGBP1 has a role in regulating this 
ratio of gene-body associated compared to total chromatin-bound RNAPII complexes (Figure 
S3A-B).  As  expected,  DRB  treatment  decreased  the  ratio  of  RNAPII-pS2  levels  over  total 
RNAPII. Triptolide, an XPB/TFIIH inhibitor (Leuenroth and Crews, 2008; Titov et al., 2011), 
induced  rapid  proteasomal  degradation  of  both  RNAPII-pS2  and  total  RNAPII  complexes, 
confirming the specificity of the used antibodies (Figures S3A-B).  
To confirm this result with a more quantitative method and discriminate between different cell 
cycle stages, we performed immunofluorescence of pre-extracted cells to determine the levels of 
8 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
chromatin-bound total RNAPII and RNAPII-pS2 per cell. We also included pulse labelling of cells 
with 5-Ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) to discriminate between S-phase and non-S-phase cells 
(Figure  3A-C  and  Figures  S3C-F).  The  S-phase  population  was  reduced  upon  CGGBP1 
depletion,  confirming  the  flow  cytometry  results  (Figure  3C  and  Figure  2B).  CGGBP1 
knockdown  led  to  a  small  but  significant  increase  in  both  chromatin-bound  RNAPII  and 
RNAPII-pS2 signals (Figures S3C-F). Transcription inhibition by DRB resulted in a significant 
decrease in nuclear intensities, although CGGBP1-depleted cells always retained higher levels 
compared to control siRNA cells (Figure S3C-F). Interestingly, calculating the per-cell ratio of 
RNAPII-pS2 versus total RNAPII in EdU (-) and EdU (+) cells showed that the increase in 
RNAPII-pS2 signal in CGGBP1-depleted cells was mainly derived from S-phase cells (Figure 
3B),  suggesting  that  CGGBP1  mitigates  the  accumulation  of  chromatin-bound  RNAPII-pS2 
during active DNA replication. Importantly, transcription inhibition by DRB rescued this effect in 
CGGBP1-depleted S-phase cells (Figure 3B), supporting the notion that this CGGBP1-induced 
stalling of RNAPII is transcription-dependent. 
To analyse more specifically the effect of CGGBP1 overexpression on RNAPII chromatin binding, 
we performed a similar immunofluorescence assay against total RNAPII and RNAPII-pS2 in cells 
overexpressing HA-CGGBP1 and control cells (Figure 3D-I and Figure S3G-H). In addition, we 
included pulse-labelling with EdU and observed a significant decrease of EdU-positive cells in 
CGGBP1-overexpressing cells (Figure 3I), similar to what we observed in CGGBP1 knockdown 
cells (Figure 3C). Interestingly, chromatin-bound RNAPII-pS2 levels dramatically decreased in 
CGGBP1-overexpressing  cells,  whereas  only  a  mild  effect  was  observed  for  total  RNAPII 
(Figures  3E-F),  suggesting that  high  levels  of  CGGBP1  impair RNAPII-pS2.  Consistently, 
splitting the HA-CGGBP1 transfected cell population into HA (-) and HA (+) cells revealed that 
this decrease was only observed in transfected HA (+) cells (Figure 3G-H), providing strong 
support that this effect was directly correlated with CGGBP1 levels and not due to secondary 
effects from transfecting different constructs. Since RNAPII-pS2 is a mark of elongating RNAPII, 
these data are consistent with the preferential enrichment of CGGBP1 binding sites at promoter 
regions and implies that CGG repeats decorated with high levels of CGGBP1 impair transcription 
initiation and/or promoter escape/transcription elongation.  
 
9 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
CGGBP1 levels are important to mitigate transcription-replication interference 
Given that the accumulation of RNAPII-pS2 in CGGBP1-depleted cells occurs preferentially 
during the S-phase (Figure 3B), we wondered whether CGGBP1’s transcription regulatory role 
was associated with a putative role in managing transcription-replication conflicts (TRCs). To 
evaluate TRC levels, proximity ligation assay (PLA) was performed in pre-extracted cells using 
anti-PCNA  antibody  and  RNAPII-pS2  as  markers  of  active  replication  and  transcription, 
respectively. Strikingly, EdU-positive CGGBP1-depleted cells showed a substantial increase in 
TRC-PLA  foci compared to control  knockdown  cells  (Figures  4A-B).  We  also  observed  a 
substantial decrease of EdU incorporation as a measure of DNA synthesis rates in siCGGBP1 
versus siControl S-phase cells, suggesting that DNA replication is impaired in the absence of 
CGGBP1 (Figure 4C).  
Given that CGGBP1 binds preferentially at actively transcribed promoter sites (Figure 1) and its 
depletion leads to elevated TRCs and replication stress (Figure 4), we investigated whether 
CGGBP1  co-localizes  with  initiating  RNAPII  using  a  specific  antibody  against  RNAPII 
phospho-Ser5 (RNAPII-pS5). We observed significantly more RNAPII-pS5-CGGBP1 PLA foci 
per cell in comparison to the single antibody controls independently of the S-phase stage (Figures 
S4A-B), suggesting that CGGBP1 can directly interact with initiating RNAPII. Interestingly, we 
also observed an interaction of CGGBP1 with PCNA and RPA32-pS33 (Figures  S4C  and 
S4C-D). This result indicates that CGGBP1 may colocalize with sites of active replication and 
replication  fork  stalls  in  S-phase  cells,  further  supporting  a  role  of  CGGBP1  at  sites  of 
transcription-induced replication interference. 
Pyridostatin-induced DNA damage in S-phase cells is dependent on cellular CGGBP1 levels 
We next investigated the mechanism behind the observed transcription-induced replication stress 
in cells with altered CGGBP1 levels. We hypothesized that the binding of CGGBP1 at these short 
repeats may counteract or prevent the formation of secondary DNA structures such as G4 and 
R-loops. To test this hypothesis, we first treated cells with pyridostatin (PDS), a highly selective 
G-quadruplex–binding small molecule expected to stabilize intracellular G4 structures regardless 
of sequence variability (Müller et al., 2010; Rodriguez et al., 2008, 2012). It was previously 
reported that PDS can displace certain G4-binding proteins such as transcription factors due to the 
high binding affinity between PDS and G4s to disturb gene expression (Li et al., 2020, 2021). 
10 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
However, the influence of PDS on CGGBP1 binding and genome-wide gene expression regulation 
have been unexplored. Therefore, we treated siControl and siCGGBP1-depleted cells with PDS 
and monitored nascent transcription with a short pulse of EU labelling and DNA damage by 
γ
immunofluorescence against  H2AX. Interestingly, PDS-treated control knockdown cells showed 
a significant increase in EU incorporation (Figures 5A-B). Because G4s are bound by several 
transcription factors (Spiegel et al., 2021), PDS-binding to G4s may compete with the transcription 
factor landscape, thereby inducing the observed increase of EU incorporation. PDS treatment in 
γ
siControl cells also led to increased  H2AX foci formation (Figures 5A and 5C), consistent with 
the model that PDS-stabilized G4s provoke double-strand breaks (DSBs) by forming a strong 
block to DNA or RNA polymerases (Belotserkovskii et al., 2017; Broxson et al., 2011; De and 
Michor,  2011;  Lemmens  et  al.,  2015;  Sarkies  et  al.,  2010,  2012). Unexpectedly, CGGBP1 
depletion in PDS-treated cells largely rescued these effects, leading to less EU incorporation and a 
γ
reduction of  H2AX foci formation compared to siControl cells (Figures 5A-C). This reduction of 
EU incorporation primarily occurred in non-nucleolar regions, indicating that CGGBP1 mainly 
affected nuclear transcription rates upon PDS treatment (Figure S5A-B). Together, this suggests 
that the presence of CGGBP1 at PDS-stabilized G4 structures may result in a stronger impediment 
to the replication and transcriptional machinery, leading to more DNA damage.  
To further test the dependency of this effect on DNA replication, we repeated the experiment and 
included a short pulse of EdU in order to distinguish between cells in S-phase and non-S-phase 
γ
cells. PDS-induced  H2AX foci were particularly high in EdU-positive siControl cells (Figures 
5D-E),  suggesting  that  a  large  fraction  of  PDS-induced  DNA  damage  occurs  during  DNA 
replication. Consistently, we also observed less EdU-positive cells (Figure S5C) and a major 
reduction in EdU incorporation upon PDS treatment in S-phase cells (Figure 5F). Importantly, 
γ
CGGBP1 depletion efficiently decreased  H2AX foci particularly in S-phase cells and could 
partially restore EdU incorporation (Figure 5D-F), supporting the notion that the combined 
binding of CGGBP1 at PDS-stabilized G4 structures is a major roadblock to replication forks and 
therefore causes DNA damage checkpoint activation and cell cycle arrest. 
R-loops are enriched at a CGG-repeat containing episomal transcription unit after CGGBP1 
depletion 
 
11 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
To probe the consequences of CGGBP1 binding on the formation of co-transcriptional R-loops, we 
took advantage of a previously established episomal system to induce R-loop dependent TRCs 
(Hamperl et al., 2017). In order to provide a suitable substrate for CGGBP1 binding at an active 
promoter  site,  we  introduced  10  CGG  repeats  ((CGG) )  downstream  of  the  doxycycline 
10
(DOX)-inducible Tet-ON promoter to allow for controlled transcription over the (CGG)  repeat 
10
sequence. Because a similar approach with another R-loop forming sequence showed robust 
R-loop accumulation only in the HO orientation (Hamperl et al., 2017), we inserted the (CGG)  
10
sequence in a head-on (HO) orientation to the unidirectional Epstein–Barr virus replication origin 
oriP (Figure 6A). We then generated monoclonal human U-2OS cell lines with a stable integration 
of ~5-70 plasmid copies per cell (Figure S6A–B).  
We performed siRNA-mediated knockdown of CGGBP1 for 72h (Figure 6B) and simultaneously 
induced transcription of (CGG) . RT-qPCR indicated dose-dependent transcriptional activation of 
10
Tet-ON controlled (CGG)  in control knockdown cells (Figure 6C). Interestingly, transcription 
10
through (CGG)  was strongly reduced in CGGBP1-depleted cells compared to control cells 
10
(Figure 6C). This could indicate a role for CGGBP1 in efficient RNAPII translocation through the 
plasmid-derived CGG repeats. Importantly, this transcriptional defect could not be explained by 
changes in the plasmid copy number per cell as this remained unchanged at the different DOX 
concentrations (Figure S6C). To determine if this transcriptional defect caused upon CGGBP1 
depletion  stems  from  R-loop  formation  on  the  (CGG)   sequence  in  cells,  we  performed 
10
DNA-RNA  immunoprecipitation  (DRIP)  and  qPCR  on  the  plasmid  using  the  RNA-DNA 
hybrid-specific S9.6 antibody (Boguslawski et al., 1986). The siControl cells exhibited a certain 
baseline level of RNase H-sensitive RNA-DNA hybrid formation, which was not significantly 
increased upon DOX induction (Figure 6D), in line with previous data showing that non-disease 
short tracts of CGG repeats at the FMR1 locus do not show efficient R-loop formation upon their 
transcriptional activation (Groh et al., 2014). Importantly, RNA:DNA hybrids were significantly 
induced  in  the  CGGBP1-depleted  cells  after  DOX  induction  (Figure  6D).  However,  the 
transcriptional activity of the reporter gene remained reduced under (Figure 6C). This finding 
suggests that the binding of CGGBP1 to short CGG repeats counteracts or prevents the formation 
of RNA:DNA hybrids while these repeats undergo transcription, thereby enabling efficient mRNA 
production. 
12 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Together, these data provide clear evidence that CGGBP1 is a critical factor that controls the 
formation  of  genome-destabilizing R-loop  structures  that can  form  over  short  CGG  repeats 
enriched at gene promoter sites. In the absence of CGGBP1, the resulting DNA secondary 
structures  may  form  a  structural  block,  directly  interfering  with  both  RNAPII  transcription 
elongation and replication fork progression.     
Discussion 
Short CGG tandem repeats prone to G4 and R-loop formation are enriched at gene promoter 
sites bound by CGGBP1 
Short (CGG)  tandem repeats with n < 10 are frequent DNA motifs commonly found throughout 
n
the genome of higher eukaryotes (Willems et al, 2014) without any major impact on DNA 
replication fork progression or transcription elongation. However, in vitro studies suggest that 
oligonucleotides with only 5-7 CGG repeats are able to form stable G4 structures (Fry and Loeb, 
1994), which were demonstrated to be efficient replication impediments in vivo (Sarkies et al., 
2012). In addition, CGG trinucleotide repeats have an inherent sequence bias towards high GC 
content and GC-skew, two features well known to promote the formation of co-transcriptional 
R-loop structures (Ginno et al., 2012, 2013). This raises an important conceptual question whether 
this apparently inert behaviour of CGG repeats in vivo is due to these sequences being incapable of 
forming secondary structures in vivo or whether it is the result of other interacting proteins that 
counteract structure formation at these repeat sequences. We now show in the context of CGG 
repeats that these sequences are enriched in the human genome at gene promoter sites that are 
prone to G4 and R-loop secondary structure formation and identify the CGG-sequence specific 
DNA-binding factor CGGBP1 as a specific interactor of these sequences in vivo (Figure 1A-C). It 
is important to note that despite clear enrichment of a CGG motif (Figure 1D), not all identified 
CGGBP1 ChIP-Seq peaks were directly associated with the presence of short CGG repeats, 
suggesting that CGGBP1 binding to chromatin may also be affected by additional chromatin 
features such as an interaction with nucleosomes or other chromatin components. Consistently, 
earlier  studies  identified CGGBP1  as  part  of  a  heterotrimeric  complex  with  NFIX  and  the 
high-mobility group protein HMGN1 that acts as a bidirectional regulator of HSF1 transcription 
(Singh  et  al.,  2009).  Thus,  specific binding partners  of  CGGBP1  could  mediate additional 
interactions with certain chromatin features and therefore expand the genomic CGGBP1 target 
13 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
sites.  Nevertheless,  the  enrichment  of  CGGBP1  at  gene  promoters  was  clearly  observed 
irrespective of its precise targeting or binding mechanism.   
Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels leads to transcription elongation impairment and replication 
fork stalling 
Previous work has demonstrated that increased levels of DNA secondary structures such as G4 and 
co-transcriptional RNA:DNA hybrids provide roadblocks for both RNA and DNA polymerases, 
resulting in transcription elongation impairment and replication fork slow-down and stalling 
(Belotserkovskii and Hanawalt, 2015; Gan et al., 2011; Groh et al., 2014; Tous and Aguilera, 
2007).  Consistently,  we  observed  that  CGGBP1-depleted  cells  show  a  transcription-  and 
S-phase-dependent accumulation of active RNAPII on chromatin (Figure 3), which resulted in 
replication fork impediment and increased transcription-replication interference as measured by a 
TRC-PLA assay (Figure 4). Notably, we observed an increase in nascent transcription as measured 
by EU incorporation in CGGBP1-depleted cells (Figure 2A-B), which is difficult to reconcile with 
our model of RNAPII transcription elongation impairment in S-phase. One potential explanation is 
that  CGGBP1  additionally  regulates  genes  transcribed  by  other  RNA  polymerases.  In  fact, 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes transcribed by RNAPI are rich in CGG repeats (Müller-Hartmann 
et al., 2000) and CGGBP1 shows preferential binding to rRNA gene clusters on the small arms of 
acrocentric chromosomes, which is consistent with our finding that EU signal is increased in 
nucleoli after CGGBP1 knockdown (Figure S5A-B). In addition, CGGBP1 was found to bind 
RNAPIII promoters, acting as a transcription inhibitor particularly at the repetitive Alu-SINE 
elements (Agarwal et al., 2014). Together, the observed global increase of EU incorporation in 
CGGBP1-depleted cells may partially be explained by the changed transcription dynamics of these 
two  other  nuclear  RNA  polymerases.  Conversely,  CGGBP1  overexpression  led  to  a  global 
decrease in EU incorporation as well as a decrease of chromatin-bound RNAPII (Figure 2 and 
Figure 3), suggesting that excess CGGBP1 levels has an inhibitory effect most likely on all nuclear 
RNA polymerases. Together, these data suggest that a balanced level of cellular CGGBP1 levels is 
critical for efficient nuclear transcription rates, but the detailed mechanism how CGGBP1 controls 
transcription elongation rates of the different RNA polymerases is likely complex and may also be 
caused by secondary effects due to the cell cycle arrest or DNA damage checkpoint activation in 
CGGBP1-depleted cells. 
14 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Promoter-bound CGGBP1 slows RNAPII elongation and prevents G4/R-loop formation 
Instead, the focus of this study was to analyze the role of CGGBP1 in preventing or counteracting 
DNA secondary structure formation. For this, we used two distinct approaches in order to test the 
role of CGGBP1 in G4 or R-loop resolution. Stabilization of G4 structures by PDS caused 
replication impairment and DNA damage in S-phase cells, which could be partially rescued by 
CGGBP1 depletion (Figure 5). This surprising finding suggests that the combined presence of 
CGGBP1 at PDS-stabilized G4 structures may result in a stronger roadblock to replication forks 
and therefore cause more replication stress and DNA damage and provides a clear connection 
between CGGBP1 levels and G4-induced DNA damage. Interestingly, CGGBP1 has a C-terminal 
SQ motif that was identified as a substrate of the ATR DNA damage response kinase (Matsuoka et 
al., 2007; Singh and Westermark, 2015; Traven and Heierhorst, 2005). Thus, CGGBP1 may have 
a functional role in DNA checkpoint signalling of G4-induced DNA damage, but more detailed 
studies will be necessary to understand the mechanistic details of this interaction. 
Finally, we took advantage of an episomal plasmid system with a short transcription-inducible 
CGG repeat and show that CGGBP1 depletion blocks transcription and induces the formation of 
RNA:DNA hybrid structures on the repeat sequence (Figure 6), providing strong evidence that 
CGGBP1 counteracts or prevents the formation of RNA:DNA hybrids while these repeats undergo 
transcription, thereby inhibiting efficient mRNA production. Together, we propose a model that 
short trinucleotide repeats can give rise to genome-destabilizing secondary structures and rely on 
specific  cellular  factors  such as  CGGBP1  to  maintain accurate  transcription  and  replication 
programs (Figure 7). In the future, it will be interesting to understand if other trinucleotide repeat 
ć
sequences such as GAA repeats that show similar replication fork impediments (Švikovi  et al., 
2019) and human disease-relevant instabilities (Den Dunnen, 2018; Jones et al., 2017) also rely on 
the interaction of sequence-specific binding partners to reduce secondary structure formation, 
thereby playing important roles in transcription of the repeats and preventing clashes between 
transcription and replication. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the ENCODE production laboratory for the CGGBP1 ChIP-Seq dataset, Adam Burton 
and Maria-Elena Torres-Padilla for discussions and comments on the manuscript. S.H. is 
15 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
supported by the European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant 852798 ConflictResolution) 
and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (CRC1064).  
Author Contributions   
Conceptualization and methodology, H.U., E.K. and S.H.; formal analysis,  H.U. and S.H.; data 
curation and software, M.T., M.L., A.E; visualization, H.U., and S.H.; funding acquisition, project 
administration, supervision, and resources, S.H. investigation and validation, H.U., M.L., M.T., 
M.W., E.K., A.C., M.W., C.L. and S.H. writing (original draft), S.H.; writing (review and editing), 
H.U., M.L., M.T., M.W., A.C, C.L., E.K., M.W., and S.H. 
Declaration of Interests   
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Figure titles and legends 
Figure 1. Global profiling of CGGBP1 binding sites in the human genome  
A) Example tracks of CGGBP1 ChIP-seq signal in K562 cells at different genes of two replicates 
compared to the control. 
B) Pie chart showing the distribution of CGGBP1 ChIP-seq peak annotation relative to the position in 
the genome. 
C) Metagene plots and underlying heatmaps of CGGBP1 ChIP-seq signal of two replicates relative to 
the control across all annotated transcripts. 
D) Motif probability graph and DNA sequence logos of the most significant hits found in the 
CGGBP1 ChIP-seq peak sequences. 
E)  Summary plot of predicted G4 quadruplex formation scores at either TSSs with a CGGBP1 binding 
peak in proximity or two random sets of TSSs. Statistical significance was calculated using two 
tailed student’s t-test on the medians of 10 bp windows at the TSS +/- 100 bp indicated by the grey 
box. Significance was tested against both controls in individual t-tests indicated by the color of the 
stars. 
F)  Summary plot of DRIP-seq signal at either TSSs with a CGGBP1 binding peak in proximity or two 
random sets of TSSs. 
16 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 2. Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels leads to global transcriptional changes  
A) Western Blot of U2OS total cell extracts after 24, 48 and 72 h of CGGBP1 knockdown compared 
to control siRNA. CDC45 and GAPDH are loading controls. N=1. 
B) Quantification of cell cycle distribution in BrdU cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry upon 
treatment of U2OS cells with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 24, 48 and 72 h (flow cytometry profiles 
in Figure S2A). N=1. 
C) Example immunofluorescence (IF) images of EU incorporation in U2OS cells upon 72 h CGGBP1 
knockdown compared to control siRNA. For transcriptional inhibition, 100 µM DRB was added 2 
h before fixation. N=1. 
D) Quantification of mean nuclear EU signal in all fields similar to C). For transcriptional inhibition, 
100 µM DRB was added 2 h before fixation. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
E)  Gene expression of selected examples measured by RT-qPCR of cDNA from U2OS Tet-ON 
pHU43 clone 2 (see Figure 6) treated with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 72 h and no DOX. Shown is 
the fold change relative to MCM3 and normalized to siControl. Statistical significance was 
calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=3. 
F)  Western Blot of HA-CGGBP1 overexpression in U2OS cells. Total cell extracts were taken 48 or 
72 h after transfection of the overexpression plasmid. CDC45 and GAPDH are loading controls. 
WT CGGBP1 is not visible here due to the high amount of HA-CGGBP1. N=1.  
G) Example  IF images of EU incorporation and HA signal in U2OS cells upon HA-CGGBP1 
overexpression  compared  to  an  empty  overexpression  plasmid  control.  For  transcriptional 
inhibition, 100 µM DRB was added 2 h before fixation. N=1. 
H) Quantification of mean nuclear EU signal in all fields similar to G). Data are represented as mean ± 
standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1.  
I)  Quantification of mean nuclear EU signal in all fields similar to G). Only the overexpression 
condition is shown with cells split into HA+ or HA-. Statistical significance was calculated using 
ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
Figure 3. Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels impacts the level of chromatin-bound RNAPII 
complexes 
17 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A) Example IF images of total RNAPII, RNAPII pS2 and EdU incorporation upon treatment of U2OS 
cells with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 72 h. For transcriptional inhibition, 100 µM DRB or 1 µM 
triptolide were added 2 h before fixation. N=1. 
B) Box plot of ratios between RNAPII pS2 and total RNAPII mean integrated nuclear signal in the 
same cell calculated for EdU+ and EdU- cells in each condition of A). Statistical significance was 
calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. Further quantifications in Figure S3. 
C) Bar graph showing the percentage of EdU+ and EdU- cells in all fields similar to A). N=1. 
D) Example IF images of RNAPII pS2 and EdU incorporation in U2OS cells upon HA-CGGBP1 
overexpression  compared  to  an  empty  overexpression  plasmid  control.  For  transcriptional 
inhibition, 100 µM DRB was added 2 h before fixation. N=1. 
E)
  Quantification of mean nuclear total RNAPII signal in in all conditions of D). Data are represented 
as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way 
 
ANOVA. N=1. Further quantifications in FigureS3.
F)  Quantification of mean nuclear RNAPII-pS2 signal in all fields similar to D). Data are represented 
as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way 
ANOVA. N=1. 
G) Quantification  of  mean  nuclear  total  RNAPII  signal  in  all  conditions  of  D).  Only  the 
overexpression condition is shown with cells split into HA+ or HA-. Data are represented as mean 
± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. 
N=1. 
H) Quantification  of  mean  nuclear  RNAPII-pS2  signal  in  all  fields  similar  to  D).  Only  the 
overexpression condition is shown with cells split into HA+ or HA-. Data are represented as mean 
± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. 
N=1. 
I)  Bar graph showing the percentage of EdU+ and EdU- cells in all fields similar to D). N=1. 
Figure 4. CGGBP1 levels are important to mitigate transcription-replication interference 
A) Example IF images of EdU incorporation and RNAPII-pS2 - PCNA proximity ligation assay foci 
in U2OS cells upon 48 h CGGBP1 knockdown compared to control siRNA. N=2.  
B) Quantification of nuclear PLA foci in EdU- and EdU+ cells in all fields similar to A). Data are 
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary 
one-way ANOVA. N=2. 
18 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
C) Quantification of mean nuclear EdU signal of EdU+ cells in all fields similar to A). Data are 
represented as mean of the z-scores ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated 
using two-tailed student’s t-test. N=2. 
Figure  5.  Pyridostatin-induced  DNA  damage  in  S-phase  cells  is  dependent  on  cellular 
CGGBP1 levels  
γ
A) Example IF images of  H2AX signal and EU incorporation in U2OS cells upon 72 h CGGBP1 
knockdown compared to control siRNA. Cells were treated with 20 µM pyridostatin (PDS) or with 
500 µM hydroxyurea for 4h or 2h before fixation, respectively. N=1. 
B) Quantification of mean nuclear EU signal in all fields similar to A). The data of siControl and 
siCGGBP1  without  treatment  are  already  shown  in  Figure  2D,  but  plotted  here  again  for 
comparison reasons. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance 
was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
γ
C) Quantification of nuclear  H2AX foci in all fields similar to A). Data are represented as mean ± 
standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
γ
D) Example IF images of  H2AX signal and EdU incorporation in U2OS cells upon 72 h CGGBP1 
knockdown compared to control siRNA. Cells were treated with 20 µM PDS for 4h before fixation. 
N=1. 
γ
E)  Quantification of nuclear  H2AX foci in all fields similar to D). Cells of the same condition are 
split  into  EdU-  and  EdU+.  Data  are  represented  as  mean  ±  standard  deviation.  Statistical 
significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. Further quantification in 
Figure S5A. 
F)  Quantification of mean nuclear EdU signal of EdU+ cells in all fields similar to D). Data are 
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary 
one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
Figure  6.  CGGBP1  binding  opposes  secondary  structure  formation  and  promotes 
transcription elongation on an episomal system 
A) Plasmid map of the episomal transcription-replication conflict system with 10 CGG repeats 
inserted at the Tet-ON promoter. EBNA1 forces unidirectional replication at the oriP. Doxycycline 
treatment induces transcription leading to head-on conflicts with replication. 
19 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
B) Gene expression of CGGBP1 measured by RT-qPCR of cDNA from U2OS Tet-ON pHU43 clone 
2 carrying the episomal system and treated with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 72 h. Cells were 
treated with 0, 100 or 1000 ng/ml DOX for 72 h. Shown is the fold change relative to MCM3 and 
normalized to the 0 ng/ml DOX control. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=3, except for the 
siCGGBP1 1000 ng/ml condition. See Figure  S6A-B for characterization of U2OS Tet-ON 
pHU43 clone 2. 
C) Gene expression downstream of (CGG)  measured by RT-qPCR of cDNA from U2OS Tet-ON 
10
pHU43 clone 2 carrying the episomal system and treated with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 72 h. 
Cells were treated with 0, 100 or 1000 ng/ml DOX for 72 h. Shown is the fold change relative to 
MCM3 and normalized to the 0 ng/ml DOX siControl condition. Data are represented as mean ± 
standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=3, 
except for the siCGGBP1 1000 ng/ml condition (N=2). 
D) DNA:RNA  hybrid  immunoprecipitation  (DRIP)  with  the  S9.6  antibody  downstream  of  the 
(CGG) repeat measured by qPCR of U2OS Tet-ON pHU43 clone 2 treated with siControl or 
10 
siCGGBP1 and 0 or 1000 ng/ml DOX for 72h. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=3, except for RNaseH 
controls (N=2). 
Figure 7. Model of how CGGBP1 binding at short CGG repeats opposes secondary structure 
formation and promotes transcription elongation  
The presence of CGGBP1 at promoter sites prevents the formation of DNA secondary structures 
capable of blocking RNA polymerases and replication forks. Depletion of CGGBP1 leads to the 
formation of DNA secondary structures resulting in the accumulation of stalled RNA polymerases. 
In S-phase, replication forks encounter the stalled RNA polymerases, leading to unscheduled 
transcription-replication conflicts and replication impairment. 
Tables with titles and legends 
Supplementary Table 1 Oligonucleotides used in this study 
Oligo  Sequence  Description 
CGGBP1_ TATCCTTACGATGTACCAGAC Primer for amplification of CGGBP1 cDNA, see Singh et al., 
cDNA_fw  TATGCTGAGCGATTTGTAGTA 2014 
20 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
ACAGC 
CGGBP1_ TATAGCGGCCGCTCAACAAT Primer for amplification of CGGBP1 cDNA, see Singh et al., 
cDNA_rev  CTTGTGAGTTGAG  2014 
CGGBP1_ TGTAGGTACCGCCACCATGG Primer for amplification of CGGBP1 cDNA with HA tag at 5’ 
PCR2_fw  GATATCCTTACGATGTACCAG end, see Singh et al., 2014 
  ACTATGCT 
CGGBP1_ TATAGCGGCCGCTCAACAAT Primer for amplification of CGGBP1 cDNA with stop codon 
PCR2_rev  CTTGTGAGTTGAG  at 3’ end, see Singh et al., 2014 
MOV10_e CGGCTGCGGACCATTTATAA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
x1_fw  MOV10 
MOV10_e CTGCGGTTGGTGGGTTTTAA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
x2_rev  MOV10 
MALAT1_ AAAAGCAGACCCAGAGCAGT  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
ex1_fw  MALAT1 
MALAT1_ CCTGAAAGTGCTCACAAGGC  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
ex1_rev  MALAT1 
TLCD1_ex CTCTGTCGCCTGCCCCTA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
1_fw  TLCD1 
TLCD1_ex CGCCGTCTCAATCTCCACTA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
1_fw  TLCD1 
UHRF1_ex ACTCGCTGTCCAGGCTGA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
1_fw  UHRF1 
UHRF1_ex ATGGTGTCATTCAGGCGGA  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
2_rev  UHRF1 
ZNF703_e GTGTCCCTCTTGCCACCG  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
x1_fw  ZNF703 
ZNF703_e AAGGGGCTCTTCTTGGCG  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
x2_rev  ZNF703 
MCM3_ex ACCGGCTGATTGTCAATGTG  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
2_fw  MCM3 
MCM3_ex TGCCTTCCAGTCCTACGTAG  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
3_rev  MCM3 
CGGBP1_ TGCCATTAGTGACCACCTC  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
ex1_fw  CGGBP1 
CGGBP1_ TCTCAAGTGGGATGTTGGC  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels of 
ex1_rev  CGGBP1 
Tet-ON_fw  GGCTAGCAAGCTTGATGTG  Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels 
and DRIP enrichment downstream of the (CGG)  repeat on 
10
plasmid pHU 
 
Tet-ON_re GCAATAGCATCACAAATTTC Primer used for RT-qPCR to determine transcription levels 
v  ACA  and DRIP enrichment downstream of the (CGG)  repeat on 
10
plasmid pHU 
OriP_fw  TTTTCGCTGCTTGTCCTTTT  Primer used for qPCR to determine plasmid copy number 
OβriP_rev  TTTTCGCTGCTTGTCCTTTT  Primer used for qPCR to determine plasmid cβopy number 
-actin_in1 CGGGGTCTTTGTCTGAGC  Primer used for qPCR to determine genomic  -actin DNA 
_βfw  amount as reference  β
-actin_in1 CAGTTAGCGCCCAAAGGAC  Primer used for qPCR to determine genomic  -actin DNA 
_rev  amount as reference 
 
Supplementary Table 2 Plasmids used in this study 
Plasmid  Insert  Construction/Source 
21 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
pcDNA3.1+  -  Thermo Fisher Scientific (Cat. #V79020) 
pcDNA3.1 HA-CGGBP1  HA-CGGBP1  Cloned as described in Singh et al., 2014 
pHU43   (CGG)   Insertion of KpnI and HindIII cut Q-block fragment containing 
10
(CGG)  into pSH36 from Hamperl et al., 2017. Cloned following 
10
Scior et al., 2011 
STAR Methods 
Cell lines 
Human osteosarcoma-derived cells (U2OS) that express the tetracycline regulated transactivator 
Tet-ON were used for all experiments. U2OS Tet-ON cells were cultured in DMEM (GIBCO) 
supplemented with 10% Tet-ON approved FBS, 4.5 g/L D-Glucose and L-Glutamine, 110 mg/L 
sodium pyruvate and penicillin/streptomycin in 5% CO  at 37°C . To generate monoclonal U2OS 
2
Tet-ON cell lines, cells were transfected with the vector pHU43 ((CGG)  -HO) and selected with 
10
200 µg/ml hygromycin B for 2-3 weeks. Surviving cells were harvested and single cells were 
sorted into 96-wells by flow cytometry (BD FACSMelody) and cultured to expand over 5-6 weeks 
under selection in 200 µg/ml hygromycin. 
Oligonucleotides and plasmids 
Standard techniques were used for cloning of plasmids. Complete lists of oligonucleotides and 
plasmids used in this study can be found in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2. 
Plasmid and siRNA transfections 
TransIT-LT1 (Mirus) or Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (ThermoFisher) transfection reagents were 
used  for  all  plasmid  and  siRNA  transfections,  respectively,  following  the  manufacturer’s 
instructions. For plasmid transfections, a ratio of 2 µg plasmid DNA per 6 µL transfection reagent 
was used and the mixture was incubated for 30min before adding dropwise to cells. For siRNA 
transfections, a ratio of 50 nM siRNA per 2 µL transfection reagent was used and the mixture was 
incubated for 20min before adding dropwise to cells. For all transfections, culture media was 
replaced with fresh media after 12-16 h incubation at 37°C. 
Chromatin fractionation and Western blotting 
Chromatin fractionation was performed as described (Méndez and Stillman, 2000) with minor 
changes. In brief, 1 x 106 cells were resuspended in buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH7.9, 10 mM KCL, 
1.5 mM MgCl , 340 mM sucrose, 10% Glycerol, 1 mM DTT) and lysed by incubating with Triton 
2
22 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
X-100 at a final concentration of 0.1% for min on ice. Nuclei were collected by low-speed 
centrifugation at 1300 g for 4min and 4°C and washed once in buffer A before lysing in buffer B (3 
mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail) for 30min on ice. Insoluble 
chromatin was collected by centrifugation at 1700 g for 4 min and 4 °C and washed once with 
buffer B before resuspending final chromatin pellet in 2x LDS sample buffer. 
For whole cell extracts, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 
0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 1% NP-40, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail).  
Whole cell extracts and chromatin fractions were sonicated alternating 2.5s on, 2.5s off for 10 min 
(Bioruptor  UCD-200)  before  separation  by  eletrophoresis  and  transfer  onto  polyvinylidene 
difluoride  membranes.  Membranes  were  blocked  in  5%  skimmed  milk  dissolved  in  0.1% 
Tween/PBS overnight at 4°C. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies dissolved in 3% 
BSA/PBS overnight at 4°C followed by washing thrice with 0.1% Tween/PBS. HRP-linked 
secondary antibodies were then added for 1h at 25°C and washed thrice prior to signal detection 
using ECL reagent. Primary antibodies: CGGBP1 (1:1000), CDC45 (1:1000), GAPDH (1:10000), 
γ
total RNAPII (1:5000), RNAPII pS2 (1:5000), H3 (1:10000),  H2AX (1:300), pRPA32 S33 
(1:2500). 
Immunofluorescence imaging 
γ
For all IF experiments, except for EU incorporation and  H2AX staining, cells were pre-extracted 
with CSK100 buffer (100 mM NaCl, 300 mM Sucrose, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM MOPS, 0.5% Triton 
X-100 in PBS) and washed once with PBS. Cells were fixed with 4% PFA/PBS for 15 min, washed 
once with PBS, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 10 min and washed once more. For EdU 
or EU staining, cells were incubated with 10 µM EdU or 0.5 mM EU 30 min before fixation and a 
commercial kit was used to attach fluorescent dyes with a click reaction (ThermoFisher). Cells 
were blocked in 3% BSA/PBS for 1h at 25°C. Primary antibodies diluted in 3% BSA/PBS were 
added overnight followed by three PBS washes. Secondary antibodies diluted in 3 % BSA/PBS 
were added together with DAPI (5 µg/ml) for 90min followed by three PBS washes. Cells were 
imaged at 40x on a spinning disc confocal microscope (Andor Dragonfly). Images were analyzed 
using a custom ImageJ script that allows nuclei segmentation on the DAPI channel with StarDist 
(Schmidt et al., 2018). To create masks of the nucleoli in the EU channel, threshhold_yen from the 
scikit-image python package was used (van der Walt et al., 2014; Yen et al., 1995). Primary 
23 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
γ
antibodies: total RNAPII (1:2000), RNAPII pS2 (1:2000), HA-tag (1:1000),  H2AX (1:300). 
Secondary antibodies: anti-mouse-Alexa 594 (1:1000) Anti-rabbit-Alexa 647 (1.1000). 
Cell cycle analysis 
μ ′
Cells were pulse-labeled with 25  M 5-Bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) for 30 min, and washed 
once with PBS before trypsinization and harvesting. After fixing samples with ice-cold 70% 
ethanol, cells were permeabilized with 0.25% Triton X-100/PBS for 15 min on ice. To denature 
DNA to single strand, cells were incubated in 2N HCl for 15min at 25°C followed by a wash with 
100 mM sodium borate pH 8.5. Cells were blocked in 1% BSA/PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 for 
15 min, and incubated in primary BrdU antibody (1:100) for 2 h. Cells were then washed three 
times in PBS, incubated in AlexaFluoro-488 secondary antibody for 1 h, and washed three times 
with PBS. Propidium iodide (PI; 0.1 mg/mL; Sigma) and RNase A (10 mg/mL) was added to 
determine DNA content and cells were analyzed on a FACSMelody device (BD Bioscience). Cell 
cycle profiles were determined using FlowJo software. 
Reverse transcription-qPCR 
Cells  were  harvested  and  total  RNA  was  isolated  using  TRIzol  reagent  following  the 
manufacturer’s protocol. After digestion with RNase-free DNase I at 37°C for 30min, reverse 
μ
transcription was carried out with 0.5-1.0  g total RNA with random hexamer primers and 
SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase Kit. Equal amounts of cDNA were mixed with iTaq SYBR 
Green Supermix and run on a Roche LightCycler 480 Instrument II. mRNA expression levels were 
measured by the change in comparative threshold cycles with primer pairs in Table S1 and MCM3 
cDNA as a reference. 
Proximity ligation assay (PLA) 
Cells were pre-extracted with CSK100 buffer (100 mM NaCl, 300 mM Sucrose, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 
mM MOPS, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) and washed once with PBS. Cells were fixed with 4% 
PFA/PBS for 15 min, washed once with PBS, permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 10 min 
and washed once more. For EdU staining, a commercial kit was used to attach fluorescent dyes 
with a click reaction (ThermoFisher). Cells were blocked in 5% BSA/PBS for 1h at 25°C and 
incubated with primary antibodies diluted in 5 % BSA/PBS overnight at 4°C followed by two PBS 
washes. The PLA was performed following the manufacturer’s protocol (Sigma) with slight 
24 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
changes. In Brief, cells were incubated for 1h at 37°C with 1:10 diluted PLA probes in Duolink 
antibody diluent followed by two 5min washes in wash buffer A. To ligate the probes, ligase was 
added 1:70 to 1x ligation buffer and cells were incubated for 30min at 37°C followed by two 5 min 
washes in wash buffer A. For amplification, polymerase was added 1:140 to 1x amplification 
buffer and cells are incubated for 100min at 37°C followed by two 10 min washes in wash buffer B. 
For DNA staining, DAPI (5 µg/ml) diluted in PBS was added for 90 min before washing twice with 
PBS. Cells were imaged at 40x on a spinning disc confocal microscope (Andor Dragonfly). The 
number of PLA foci was quantified using ImageJ after nuclei segmentation on the DAPI channel. 
Primary antibodies: RNAPII pS2 (1:2000), PCNA (1:2000), RNAPII pS5 (1:2000), CGGBP1 
(1:100), pRPA32 S33 (1:2000). 
Plasmid copy number analysis 
Genomic DNA was isolated from 2-4 × 105 cells. After trypsinization, cells were washed in 1x PBS 
and resuspended in TE buffer followed by the addition of an equal volume of IRN buffer (50mM 
μ
Tris-HCl at pH 8, 20 mM EDTA, 0.5 M NaCl), 0.5% SDS and 10  g Proteinase K. After digestion 
μ
for 1h at 37°C, DNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform and digested with 20  g RNase A for 
1h at 37°C. After chloroform extraction, DNA was precipitated with EtOH/sodium acetate, washed 
with 70% EtOH, and resuspended in TE. DNA was digested with EcoRI (NEB) restriction enzyme 
overnight at 37°C. The plasmid copy number was analyzed with primer pairs in Table S1 by 
amplifying either the oriP region of the plasmid or a region of the genomic beta-actin gene. The 
relative plasmid copy number was determined by quantitative PCR on a Roche LightCycler 480 
Instrument II using SYBR-Green master mix (Biorad) and defined as the ratio of the amount of 2x 
oriP to the amount of beta-Actin. 
DNA:RNA immunoprecipitation 
DRIP was performed as described in Ginno et al., 2012 with minor changes. Briefly, DNA was 
extracted with phenol/chloroform, precipitated with EtOH/sodium acetate, washed with 70% 
EtOH, and resuspended in TE. DNA was sonicated with 10% duty factor, 200 cycles/burst, 140 
peak incident power for 4 min (Covaris). For RNase H-treated samples, 4 ug of DNA was treated 
with RNase H overnight at 37°C. DNA was purified by phenol/chloroform, EtOH/sodium acetate 
μ μ
precipitation as described above. 4  g of DNA was bound with 7  g of S9.6 antibody in 1 X 
binding buffer (10 mM NaPO4 pH 7, 140 mM NaCl, 0.05% Triton X-100) overnight at 4°C. 
25 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Protein G magnetic beads were added for 2 h. Bound beads were washed 3 times in binding buffer 
and elution was performed in elution buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 
Proteinase  K)  for  45  min  at  55°C.  DNA  was  purified  as  described.  Quantitative  PCR  of 
immunoprecipitated DNA fragments was performed on a Roche LightCycler 480 Instrument II 
using SYBR-Green master mix (Biorad). 
ChIP-seq data analysis 
For CGGBP1 ChIP-seq analysis, we used publicly available ENCODE data of K562 cells with the 
following identifiers: ENCSR763FNU and ENCSR334KTB (Luo et al., 2020; The ENCODE 
Project Consortium, 2012). For most analysis, tools from the web platform galaxy were used 
(Afgan et al., 2018, https://usegalaxy.eu). To annotate CGGBP1 peaks, bed files were analyzed by 
ChIPseeker. For metagene plots of CGGBP1 ChIP-seq signal, bam files of the two replicates and 
the control were converted to bigWig with bamCoverage, heatmap values were calculated by 
deeptools computeMatrix and the plot created by deeptools plotHeatmap. For genome browser 
snapshots, these bigWig files were loaded into IGV (Robinson et al., 2011). For motif enrichment 
analysis, we used MEME-ChIP (Bailey et al., 2015). To analyze G4 hunter score, DRIP signal, 
GC% and GC skew a set of ~2300 transcription start sites (TSS) that are proximal (<3kb away from 
promoter) to at least one CGGBP1 peak was selected. As controls, two sets of ~2300 randomly 
selected TSS were created. To obtain G4 quadruplex formation prediction scores, the G4 Hunter 
python script was used on FASTA files of 2kb windows around the TSS with –w 25 –s 0.0 
parameters (https://github.com/AnimaTardeb/G4-hunter.git). This calculates a mean G4 Hunter 
score at the middle of each 25 bp window sliding by 1bp across the 2kb. DRIP signal was obtained 
from a published data set (Castillo-Guzman et al., 2020, GSM4478670). The K562 DRIP-seq 
signal bigWig file was converted from build hg19 to hg38 with the CrossMap tool (Zhao et al., 
2014).  Heatmap  values  and the  plot  for  the  TSS  sets  were  created  by  computeMatrix  and 
plotHeatmap, respectively. For GC% and GC skew, a 10 kb window around the TSS was split into 
200 bp windows using a sloding window of 1bp with bedtools MakeWindowsBed. Nucleotide 
content was calculated with bedtools NucBed and GC skew was then calculated by measuring 
(G-C)/(G+C). 
Quantification and statistical analyses 
26 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Statistical parameters including the number of biological replicates (N), standard deviation and 
statistical significance are reported in the figures and the figure legends. Statistical significance is 
determined by the value of p < 0.05 by One-Way ANOVA test, where appropriate. Where 
appropriate, we confirmed that sample sizes were large enough that any deviations from normality 
did not affect the statistical test results. 
Supplemental Information titles and legends 
Figure S1. Global profiling of CGGBP1 binding sites in the human genome 
A) Summary plot of GC% of the DNA sequence at either TSSs with a CGGBP1 binding peak in 
proximity or two random sets of TSSs. 
B) Summary plot of GC skew of the DNA sequence at either TSSs with a CGGBP1 binding peak in 
proximity or two random sets of TSSs. GC skew was calculated with the formula (G-C)/(G+C). 
Figure S2. Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels leads to global transcriptional changes 
A) BrdU cell cycle analysis flow cytometry profile plots of U2OS cells upon treatment with siControl 
or siCGGBP1 for 24, 48 and 72 h. The percentage of cells in G1, S or G2 are provided next to the 
gates. N=1. 
Figure S3. Altering cellular CGGBP1 levels impacts the level of chromatin-bound RNAPII 
complexes 
A) Western Blot of U2OS chromatin fraction after treatment with siControl or siCGGBP1 for 72h. For 
transcriptional inhibition, 100 µM DRB or 1 µM triptolide were added 2 h before harvest. Depicted 
are total RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and RNAPII pS2 detected on the same blot. 
B) Quantification of mean integrated signal density relative to the H3 loading control in A). N=1. 
C) Quantification of mean nuclear total RNAPII signal in all fields similar to Figure 3A. Data are 
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary 
one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
D) Quantification of mean nuclear RNAPII-pS2 signal in all fields similar to Figure 3A. Data are 
represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary 
 
one-way ANOVA. N=1.
27 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
E)  Quantification of mean nuclear total RNAPII signal in all fields similar to Figure 3A. Cells of each 
condition are split into EdU- and EdU+. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
F)  Quantification of mean nuclear RNAPII-pS2 signal signal in all fields similar to Figure 3A. Cells 
of each condition are split into EdU- and EdU+. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
G) Quantification of mean nuclear total RNAPII signal in all fields similar to Figure 3D. Cells of each 
condition are split into EdU- and EdU. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
H) Quantification of mean nuclear RNAPII-pS2 signal in all fields similar to Figure 3D. Cells of each 
condition are split into EdU- and EdU. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
Figure S4. CGGBP1 levels are important to mitigate transcription-replication interference 
A) Example IF images of EdU incorporation and proximity ligation assay foci of the indicated 
antibody combination or single antibody controls in untreated U2OS cells. N=1. 
B) Quantification of RNAPII-pS5 – CGGBP1 PLA foci in all fields similar to A). The single antibody 
controls are shown for both antibodies. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. 
Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
C) Quantification of PCNA – CGGBP1 PLA foci in all fields similar to A). The single antibody 
controls are shown for both antibodies. For comparison reasons, the same data of the single 
CGGBP1 antibody PLA control as in B) is shown. Data are represented as mean ± standard 
deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1.  
D) Quantification of pRPA32(S33) – CGGBP1 PLA foci in all fields similar to A). The single 
antibody controls are shown for both antibodies. For comparison reasons, the same data of the 
single CGGBP1 antibody PLA control as in B) is shown. Data are represented as mean ± standard 
deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
Figure S5. Pyridostatin-induced DNA damage in S-phase cells is dependent on cellular 
CGGBP1 levels 
28 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
A) Quantification of mean nucleolar EU signal in all fields similar to Figure 5A. Data are represented 
as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using ordinary one-way 
ANOVA. N=1. 
B) Quantification of mean nuclear EU signal excluding nucleoli in all fields similar to Figure 5A. 
Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical significance was calculated using 
ordinary one-way ANOVA. N=1. 
C) Bar graph showing the percentage of EdU+ and EdU- in all fields similar to Figure 5D. N=1 
Figure  S6.  CGGBP1  binding  opposes  secondary  structure  formation  and  promotes 
transcription elongation on an episomal system 
A) Initial plasmid copy numbers of different U2OS Tet-ON monoclonal cell lines carrying the 
episomal system measured by qPCR (see Figure6A). Plasmid copy numbers were calculated with 
β
the relative ratio 2xOriP/ -actin. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. N=1. 
B) Plasmid copy numbers of U2OS Tet-ON pHU43 clone 2 during passaging measured by qPCR. The 
time between passages was 3-4 days. DOX and siRNA treatment experiments were done between 
passages 1 and 4. Data are represented as mean ± standard deviation. N=1. 
C) Plasmid copy number changes during DOX treatment of U2OS Tet-ON pHU43 clone 2. Data are 
represented as mean ± standard deviation. N=3. 
References 
Č
Afgan, E., Baker, D., Batut, B., van den Beek, M., Bouvier, D.,  ech, M., Chilton, J., Clements, 
D., Coraor, N., Grüning, B.A., et al. (2018). The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and 
collaborative biomedical analyses: 2018 update. Nucleic Acids Res 46, W537–W544. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky379. 
Agarwal, P., Enroth, S., Teichmann, M., Jernberg Wiklund, H., Smit, A., Westermark, B., and 
Singh, U. (2014). Growth signals employ CGGBP1 to suppress transcription of Alu-SINEs. Cell 
Cycle 15, 1558–1571. https://doi.org/10.4161/15384101.2014.967094. 
Aguilera, A., and Gaillard, H. (2014). Transcription and Recombination: When RNA Meets 
DNA. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6, a016543. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a016543. 
Bailey, T.L., Johnson, J., Grant, C.E., and Noble, W.S. (2015). The MEME Suite. Nucleic Acids 
Research 43, W39–W49. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv416. 
Bedrat, A., Lacroix, L., and Mergny, J.-L. (2016). Re-evaluation of G-quadruplex propensity 
with G4Hunter. Nucleic Acids Res 44, 1746–1759. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw006. 
29 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Belotserkovskii, B.P., and Hanawalt, P.C. (2015). PNA binding to the non-template DNA strand 
interferes with transcription, suggesting a blockage mechanism mediated by R-loop formation. 
Mol Carcinog 54, 1508–1512. https://doi.org/10.1002/mc.22209. 
Belotserkovskii, B.P., Soo Shin, J.H., and Hanawalt, P.C. (2017). Strong transcription blockage 
mediated by R-loop formation within a G-rich homopurine-homopyrimidine sequence localized 
in the vicinity of the promoter. Nucleic Acids Res 45, 6589–6599. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx403. 
Bensaude, O. (2011). Inhibiting eukaryotic transcription. Transcription 2, 103–108. 
https://doi.org/10.4161/trns.2.3.16172. 
Boguslawski, S.J., Smith, D.E., Michalak, M.A., Mickelson, K.E., Yehle, C.O., Patterson, W.L., 
and Carrico, R.J. (1986). Characterization of monoclonal antibody to DNA · RNA and its 
application to immunodetection of hybrids. Journal of Immunological Methods 89, 123–130. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1759(86)90040-2. 
Broxson, C., Beckett, J., and Tornaletti, S. (2011). Transcription arrest by a G quadruplex 
forming-trinucleotide repeat sequence from the human c-myb gene. Biochemistry 50, 4162–4172. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/bi2002136. 
Castillo-Guzman, D., Hartono, S.R., Sanz, L.A., and Chédin, F. (2020). SF3B1-targeted Splicing 
Inhibition Triggers Global Alterations in Transcriptional Dynamics and R-Loop Metabolism. 
2020.06.08.130583. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.130583. 
Chang, E.Y.-C., Novoa, C.A., Aristizabal, M.J., Coulombe, Y., Segovia, R., Chaturvedi, R., 
Shen, Y., Keong, C., Tam, A.S., Jones, S.J.M., et al. (2017). RECQ-like helicases Sgs1 and BLM 
regulate R-loop-associated genome instability. J Cell Biol 216, 3991–4005. 
https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201703168. 
Clark, R.M., Bhaskar, S.S., Miyahara, M., Dalgliesh, G.L., and Bidichandani, S.I. (2006). 
Expansion of GAA trinucleotide repeats in mammals. Genomics 87, 57–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2005.09.006. 
Davis, J.K., and Broadie, K. (2017). Multifarious Functions of the Fragile X Mental Retardation 
Protein. Trends Genet. 33, 703–714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2017.07.008. 
De, S., and Michor, F. (2011). DNA secondary structures and epigenetic determinants of cancer 
genome evolution. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18, 950–955. https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2089. 
Deissler, H., Behn-Krappa, A., and Doerfler, W. (1996). Purification of Nuclear Proteins from 
Human HeLa Cells That Bind Specifically to the Unstable Tandem Repeat (CGG)n in the Human 
∗
FMR1 Gene ( ). Journal of Biological Chemistry 271, 4327–4334. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.8.4327. 
Deissler, H., Wilm, M., Genç, B., Schmitz, B., Ternes, T., Naumann, F., Mann, M., and Doerfler, 
W. (1997). Rapid Protein Sequencing by Tandem Mass Spectrometry and cDNA Cloning of 
p20-CGGBP: A NOVEL PROTEIN THAT BINDS TO THE UNSTABLE TRIPLET REPEAT 
30 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
′ ′
5-d(CGG) n -3 IN THE HUMAN FMR1 GENE*. Journal of Biological Chemistry 272, 
16761–16768. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.27.16761. 
Den Dunnen, W.F.A. (2018). Chapter 27 - Trinucleotide repeat disorders. In Handbook of 
Clinical Neurology, G.G. Kovacs, and I. Alafuzoff, eds. (Elsevier), pp. 383–391. 
Feng, Y., Gutekunst, C.-A., Eberhart, D.E., Yi, H., Warren, S.T., and Hersch, S.M. (1997). 
Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein: Nucleocytoplasmic Shuttling and Association with 
Somatodendritic Ribosomes. J Neurosci 17, 1539–1547. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17-05-01539.1997. 
French, S. (1992). Consequences of replication fork movement through transcription units in 
vivo. Science 258, 1362–1365. . 
Fry, M., and Loeb, L.A. (1994). The fragile X syndrome d(CGG)n nucleotide repeats form a 
stable tetrahelical structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91, 4950–4954. . 
Fu, Y.-H., Kuhl, D.P.A., Pizzuti, A., Pieretti, M., Sutcliffe, J.S., Richards, S., Verkert, A.J.M.H., 
Holden, J.J.A., Fenwick, R.G., Warren, S.T., et al. (1991). Variation of the CGG repeat at the 
fragile X site results in genetic instability: Resolution of the Sherman paradox. Cell 67, 
1047–1058. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(91)90283-5. 
Fu, Y.V., Yardimci, H., Long, D.T., Ho, T.V., Guainazzi, A., Bermudez, V.P., Hurwitz, J., van 
Oijen, A., Schärer, O.D., and Walter, J.C. (2011). Selective bypass of a lagging strand roadblock 
by the eukaryotic replicative DNA helicase. Cell 146, 931–941. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.045. 
Gan, W., Guan, Z., Liu, J., Gui, T., Shen, K., Manley, J.L., and Li, X. (2011). R-loop-mediated 
genomic instability is caused by impairment of replication fork progression. Genes Dev. 25, 
2041–2056. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.17010011. 
Gellert, M., Lipsett, M.N., and Davies, D.R. (1962). HELIX FORMATION BY GUANYLIC 
ACID. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 48, 2013–2018. . 
Ginno, P.A., Lott, P.L., Christensen, H.C., Korf, I., and Chédin, F. (2012). R-loop formation is a 
distinctive characteristic of unmethylated human CpG island promoters. Mol Cell 45, 814–825. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.01.017. 
′ ′
Ginno, P.A., Lim, Y.W., Lott, P.L., Korf, I., and Chédin, F. (2013). GC skew at the 5 and 3 ends 
of human genes links R-loop formation to epigenetic regulation and transcription termination. 
Genome Res 23, 1590–1600. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.158436.113. 
Goracci, M., Lanni, S., Mancano, G., Palumbo, F., Chiurazzi, P., Neri, G., and Tabolacci, E. 
(2016). Defining the role of the CGGBP1 protein in FMR1 gene expression. Eur J Hum Genet 
24, 697–703. https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2015.182. 
Groh, M., Lufino, M.M.P., Wade-Martins, R., and Gromak, N. (2014). R-loops associated with 
triplet repeat expansions promote gene silencing in Friedreich ataxia and fragile X syndrome. 
PLoS Genet. 10, e1004318. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004318. 
31 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Hamperl, S., Bocek, M.J., Saldivar, J.C., Swigut, T., and Cimprich, K.A. (2017). 
Transcription-Replication Conflict Orientation Modulates R-Loop Levels and Activates Distinct 
DNA Damage Responses. Cell 170, 774-786.e19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.043. 
Jao, C.Y., and Salic, A. (2008). Exploring RNA transcription and turnover in vivo by using click 
chemistry. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 15779–15784. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808480105. 
Jones, L., Houlden, H., and Tabrizi, S.J. (2017). DNA repair in the trinucleotide repeat disorders. 
The Lancet Neurology 16, 88–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30350-7. 
Lam, E.Y.N., Beraldi, D., Tannahill, D., and Balasubramanian, S. (2013). G-Quadruplex 
structures are stable and detectable in human genomic DNA. Nat Commun 4, 1796. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2792. 
Lemmens, B., van Schendel, R., and Tijsterman, M. (2015). Mutagenic consequences of a single 
G-quadruplex demonstrate mitotic inheritance of DNA replication fork barriers. Nat Commun 6, 
8909. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9909. 
Leuenroth, S.J., and Crews, C.M. (2008). Triptolide Induced Transcriptional Arrest is Associated 
with Changes in Nuclear Sub-Structure. Cancer Res 68, 5257–5266. 
https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6207. 
Li, L., Williams, P., Gao, Z., and Wang, Y. (2020). VEZF1–guanine quadruplex DNA interaction 
regulates alternative polyadenylation and detyrosinase activity of VASH1. Nucleic Acids 
Research 48, 11994–12003. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1092. 
Li, L., Williams, P., Ren, W., Wang, M.Y., Gao, Z., Miao, W., Huang, M., Song, J., and Wang, 
Y. (2021). YY1 interacts with guanine quadruplexes to regulate DNA looping and gene 
expression. Nat Chem Biol 17, 161–168. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-020-00695-1. 
Loomis, E.W., Sanz, L.A., Chédin, F., and Hagerman, P.J. (2014). Transcription-Associated 
R-Loop Formation across the Human FMR1 CGG-Repeat Region. PLOS Genetics 10, e1004294. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1004294. 
Luo, Y., Hitz, B.C., Gabdank, I., Hilton, J.A., Kagda, M.S., Lam, B., Myers, Z., Sud, P., Jou, J., 
Lin, K., et al. (2020). New developments on the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) data 
portal. Nucleic Acids Res 48, D882–D889. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz1062. 
Matsuoka, S., Ballif, B.A., Smogorzewska, A., McDonald, E.R., Hurov, K.E., Luo, J., 
Bakalarski, C.E., Zhao, Z., Solimini, N., Lerenthal, Y., et al. (2007). ATM and ATR Substrate 
Analysis Reveals Extensive Protein Networks Responsive to DNA Damage. Science 316, 
1160–1166. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1140321. 
Müller, S., Kumari, S., Rodriguez, R., and Balasubramanian, S. (2010). Small-molecule-mediated 
G-quadruplex isolation from human cells. Nature Chem 2, 1095–1098. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.842. 
32 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Müller-Hartmann, H., Deissle′r, H., Naum′ann, F., Schmitz, B., Schröer, J., and Doerfler, W. 
(2000). The Human 20-kDa 5-(CGG)n-3-binding Protein Is Targeted to the Nucleus and Affects 
the Activity of the FMR1Promoter*. Journal of Biological Chemistry 275, 6447–6452. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.9.6447. 
Pieretti, M., Zhang, F.P., Fu, Y.H., Warren, S.T., Oostra, B.A., Caskey, C.T., and Nelson, D.L. 
(1991). Absence of expression of the FMR-1 gene in fragile X syndrome. Cell 66, 817–822. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(91)90125-i. 
Promonet, A., Padioleau, I., Liu, Y., Sanz, L., Biernacka, A., Schmitz, A.-L., Skrzypczak, M., 
Sarrazin, A., Mettling, C., Rowicka, M., et al. (2020). Topoisomerase 1 prevents replication 
stress at R-loop-enriched transcription termination sites. Nat Commun 11, 3940. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-17858-2. 
Richards, R.I., Holman, K., Yu, S., and Sutherland, G.R. (1993). Fragile X syndrome unstable 
element, p(CCG)n, and other simple tandem repeat sequences are binding sites for specific 
nuclear proteins. Human Molecular Genetics 2, 1429–1435. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/2.9.1429. 
Robinson, J.T., Thorvaldsdóttir, H., Winckler, W., Guttman, M., Lander, E.S., Getz, G., and 
Mesirov, J.P. (2011). Integrative genomics viewer. Nat Biotechnol 29, 24–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1754. 
Rodriguez, R., Müller, S., Yeoman, J.A., Trentesaux, C., Riou, J.-F., and Balasubramanian, S. 
(2008). A Novel Small Molecule That Alters Shelterin Integrity and Triggers a DNA-Damage 
Response at Telomeres. J Am Chem Soc 130, 15758–15759. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja805615w. 
Rodriguez, R., Miller, K.M., Forment, J.V., Bradshaw, C.R., Nikan, M., Britton, S., Oelschlaegel, 
T., Xhemalce, B., Balasubramanian, S., and Jackson, S.P. (2012). Small-molecule–induced DNA 
damage identifies alternative DNA structures in human genes. Nat Chem Biol 8, 301–310. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.780. 
Sankar, T.S., Wastuwidyaningtyas, B.D., Dong, Y., Lewis, S.A., and Wang, J.D. (2016). The 
nature of mutations induced by replication–transcription collisions. Nature 535, 178–181. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18316. 
Sarkies, P., Reams, C., Simpson, L.J., and Sale, J.E. (2010). Epigenetic Instability due to 
Defective Replication of Structured DNA. Mol Cell 40, 703–713. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.009. 
Sarkies, P., Murat, P., Phillips, L.G., Patel, K.J., Balasubramanian, S., and Sale, J.E. (2012). 
FANCJ coordinates two pathways that maintain epigenetic stability at G-quadruplex DNA. 
Nucleic Acids Res 40, 1485–1498. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr868. 
Sawaya, S., Bagshaw, A., Buschiazzo, E., Kumar, P., Chowdhury, S., Black, M.A., and 
Gemmell, N. (2013). Microsatellite Tandem Repeats Are Abundant in Human Promoters and Are 
Associated with Regulatory Elements. PLOS ONE 8, e54710. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054710. 
33 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Scior, A., Preissler, S., Koch, M., and Deuerling, E. (2011). Directed PCR-free engineering of 
highly repetitive DNA sequences. BMC Biotechnology 11, 87. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6750-11-87. 
Sen, D., and Gilbert, W. (1988). Formation of parallel four-stranded complexes by guanine-rich 
motifs in DNA and its implications for meiosis. Nature 334, 364–366. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/334364a0. 
Shrestha, P., Xiao, S., Dhakal, S., Tan, Z., and Mao, H. (2014). Nascent RNA transcripts 
facilitate the formation of G-quadruplexes. Nucleic Acids Research 42, 7236–7246. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku416. 
Singh, U., and Westermark, B. (2015). CGGBP1—an indispensable protein with ubiquitous 
cytoprotective functions. Upsala Journal of Medical Sciences 120. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/03009734.2015.1086451. 
Singh, U., Bongcam-Rudloff, E., and Westermark, B. (2009). A DNA Sequence Directed Mutual 
Transcription Regulation of HSF1 and NFIX Involves Novel Heat Sensitive Protein Interactions. 
PLoS One 4, e5050. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005050. 
Singh, U., Roswall, P., Uhrbom, L., and Westermark, B. (2011). CGGBP1 regulates cell cycle in 
cancer cells. BMC Molecular Biology 12, 28. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2199-12-28. 
Singh, U., Maturi, V., Jones, R.E., Paulsson, Y., Baird, D.M., and Westermark, B. (2014). 
CGGBP1 phosphorylation constitutes a telomere-protection signal. Cell Cycle 13, 96–105. 
https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.26813. 
Spiegel, J., Cuesta, S.M., Adhikari, S., Hänsel-Hertsch, R., Tannahill, D., and Balasubramanian, 
S. (2021). G-quadruplexes are transcription factor binding hubs in human chromatin. Genome 
Biology 22, 117. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-021-02324-z. 
Srivatsan, A., Tehranchi, A., MacAlpine, D.M., and Wang, J.D. (2010). Co-Orientation of 
Replication and Transcription Preserves Genome Integrity. PLOS Genetics 6, e1000810. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000810. 
ć
Švikovi , S., Crisp, A., Tan-Wong, S.M., Guilliam, T.A., Doherty, A.J., Proudfoot, N.J., 
Guilbaud, G., and Sale, J.E. (2019). R-loop formation during S phase is restricted by 
PrimPol-mediated repriming. EMBO J. 38. https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201899793. 
The ENCODE Project Consortium (2012). An Integrated Encyclopedia of DNA Elements in the 
Human Genome. Nature 489, 57–74. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11247. 
Titov, D.V., Gilman, B., He, Q.-L., Bhat, S., Low, W.-K., Dang, Y., Smeaton, M., Demain, A.J., 
Miller, P.S., Kugel, J.F., et al. (2011). XPB, a Subunit of TFIIH, Is a Target of the Natural 
Product Triptolide. Nat Chem Biol 7, 182–188. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.522. 
Tous, C., and Aguilera, A. (2007). Impairment of transcription elongation by R-loops in vitro. 
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 360, 428–432. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.06.098. 
34 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Traven, A., and Heierhorst, J. (2005). SQ/TQ cluster domains: concentrated ATM/ATR kinase 
phosphorylation site regions in DNA-damage-response proteins. BioEssays 27, 397–407. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.20204. 
Tuduri, S., Crabbé, L., Conti, C., Tourrière, H., Holtgreve-Grez, H., Jauch, A., Pantesco, V., De 
Vos, J., Thomas, A., Theillet, C., et al. (2009). Topoisomerase I suppresses genomic instability 
by preventing interference between replication and transcription. Nat Cell Biol 11, 1315–1324. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1984. 
Urban, V., Dobrovolna, J., Hühn, D., Fryzelkova, J., Bartek, J., and Janscak, P. (2016). RECQ5 
helicase promotes resolution of conflicts between replication and transcription in human cells. J 
Cell Biol 214, 401–415. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201507099. 
Verkerk, A.J., Pieretti, M., Sutcliffe, J.S., Fu, Y.H., Kuhl, D.P., Pizzuti, A., Reiner, O., Richards, 
S., Victoria, M.F., and Zhang, F.P. (1991). Identification of a gene (FMR-1) containing a CGG 
repeat coincident with a breakpoint cluster region exhibiting length variation in fragile X 
syndrome. Cell 65, 905–914. . 
van der Walt, S., Schönberger, J.L., Nunez-Iglesias, J., Boulogne, F., Warner, J.D., Yager, N., 
Gouillart, E., and Yu, T. (2014). scikit-image: image processing in Python. PeerJ 2, e453. 
https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.453. 
Willems, T., Gymrek, M., Highnam, G., Mittelman, D., and Erlich, Y. (2014). The landscape of 
human STR variation. Genome Res 24, 1894–1904. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.177774.114. 
Yen, J.C., Chang, F.J., and Chang, S. (1995). A new criterion for automatic multilevel 
thresholding. IEEE Trans Image Process 4, 370–378. https://doi.org/10.1109/83.366472. 
Zandomeni, R., Mittleman, B., Bunick, D., Ackerman, S., and Weinmann, R. (1982). Mechanism 
of action of dichloro-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole: effect on in vitro transcription. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 79, 3167–3170. . 
Zhao, X.-N., and Usdin, K. (2016). Ups and Downs: Mechanisms of Repeat Instability in the 
Fragile X-Related Disorders. Genes (Basel) 7. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes7090070. 
Zhao, H., Sun, Z., Wang, J., Huang, H., Kocher, J.-P., and Wang, L. (2014). CrossMap: a 
versatile tool for coordinate conversion between genome assemblies. Bioinformatics 30, 
1006–1007. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt730. 
 
35 
 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03.09.531843; this version posted March 9, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 

NEW PAGE