bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Primed to resolve: A single cell atlas of the shoulder 
capsule reveals a cellular basis for resolving 
inflammatory fibrosis 
 
Michael TH Ng1C, *Rowie Borst1, *Hamez Gacaferi1, Sarah Davidson1, Caio C Machado2, Ian Reekie1, 
Moustafa Attar1, Dylan Windell1, Mariola Kurowska-Stolarska3, Lucy MacDonald3, Stefano Alivernini4, Micon 
Garvilles1, Kathrin Jansen1, Ananya Bhalla1, Angela Lee1, James Charlesworth1, Rajat Chowdhury1, Paul 
Klenerman1, Kate Powell1, Carl-Philip Hackstein1, ICECAP study group†, Dominic Furniss1, Jonathan 
Rees1, Derek Gilroy6, Mark Coles1, Andrew J Carr1, *Stephen N Sansom1, *Christopher D Buckley1 and 
Stephanie G Dakin1C. 
*Contributed equally 
C Corresponding authors 
 
† ICECAP study group author list: 
Amar Rangan1,5, Stephen Gwilym1, Christopher Little1, Andrew Titchener1, Salma Chaudhury1, Philip 
Holland5, Kim Wheway1, Bridget Watkins1, Debra Beazley1, Lois Vesty-Edwards1, Louise Appleton1, Marc 
Atkinson5, Lucksy Kottam5, Juliet James5, Natalie Clark5 
 
Affiliations: 
1 University of Oxford, UK 
2 University of Sao Paulo, Brazil 
3 Research into Inflammatory Arthritis Centre Versus Arthritis (RACE), University of Glasgow, UK 
4 Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli – IRCCS, Italy 
5 South Tees NHS Trust, Middlesbrough, UK 
6 University College London, UK 
 
 
  1 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
ABSTRACT 
Fibrotic conditions are a significant global disease burden. While some therapies delay disease progression, 
none reverse fibrosis. To gain insights into how fibrosis might resolve, we developed a comparative single 
cell atlas of frozen shoulder capsule tissue; a chronic inflammatory fibrotic human disease that resolves 
spontaneously. We identified both a population of pro-inflammatory MERTKlowCD48+ macrophages (Mφ) and 
a population of MERTK+LYVE1+MRC1+Mφ enriched for negative regulators of inflammation. Micro-cultures 
of patient-derived cells identified cell-matrix interactions between MERTK+Mφ and DKK3+ and POSTN+ 
fibroblasts, suggesting that matrix remodelling plays a role in the resolution of frozen shoulder. Cross-tissue 
analysis revealed a shared gene expression cassette between MERTK+Mφ in the shoulder capsule and a 
similar cell population enriched in synovial tissues from rheumatoid arthritis patients in disease remission, 
supporting the concept that MERTK+Mφ provide a cellular basis for the resolution of inflammation and 
fibrosis. Single-cell transcriptomic profiling and spatial analysis of human foetal shoulder tissues identified 
MERTK+LYVE1+MRC1+Mφ and DKK3+ and POSTN+ fibroblast populations analogous to those identified 
in adult shoulder capsule, suggesting that the template to resolve fibrosis is established during development. 
Therapeutic  enhancement  of  crosstalk  between  MerTK+Mφ  and  pro-resolving  DKK3+  and  POSTN+ 
fibroblasts could accelerate resolution of frozen shoulder and resolve persistent inflammatory fibrotic disease 
in other tissues.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
INTRODUCTION 
Intractable inflammatory fibrotic diseases affecting soft tissues including lung, liver, kidney and skin contribute 
to 45% of all-cause mortality(1). Clinically effective therapies that promote fibrosis resolution are currently 
lacking. Recent single-cell transcriptome sequencing (scRNA-seq) analyses identify multiple scar-associated 
cell lineages that populate fibrotic visceral tissues. For example, cirrhotic human livers show enrichment for 
pro-fibrotic pathways including TNFRSF12A, PDGFR and NOTCH signalling with the cirrhotic niche being 
comprised of TREM2+CD9+Mφ and ACKR1+PLAVP+ endothelial cells (2). Alveolar macrophages from 
fibrotic lungs express high levels of mediators such as IL1RN, MMP9 and SPP1 that are known drivers of 
inflammatory fibrosis(3). Tissue resident fibroblasts are major constituents of the inflammatory fibrotic niche. 
Single cell atlases of fibrotic human and murine lungs identify proliferating pathogenic myofibroblast subsets 
that are enriched for POSTN, CTHRC1, MFAP5 and ACTA2(3-5). Interactions between tissue resident 
fibroblasts and pro-inflammatory macrophages induce fibroblast activation and irreversible deposition of 
fibrotic extracellular matrix(1, 6, 7). These studies advance understanding of the biological processes 
culminating in solid organ fibrosis; however, the cellular basis by which fibrosis could resolve is not known.  
 
To understand how intransigent human fibrotic diseases might be therapeutically encouraged to resolve, we 
investigated frozen shoulder as an example of a localised chronic inflammatory fibrotic disease affecting the 
shoulder joint capsule that is normally self-limiting over time(8). Frozen shoulder affects 10% of the working 
population, causing pain and disability through severely restricted shoulder joint motion(9-11). Although 
characterised by localised fibrosis, a role for systemic factors in the pathogenesis of frozen shoulder cannot 
be excluded as it has been associated with both diabetes(12) and Dupuytren’s disease(13).  Tissue biopsies 
from frozen shoulder patients with advanced-stage disease express inflammation-resolving proteins and 
show reduced expression of NFB target genes compared to patients with persistent shoulder tendon 
tears(14). These findings suggest that in frozen shoulder, the target tissues exhibit a resolving trajectory 
during advanced disease, which mirrors the typical clinical picture of reduced pain, stiffness and ultimate 
resolution over time. The unique biology of this under-investigated condition has the potential to unlock the 
cellular and molecular basis by which soft tissue inflammation resolves, persists or leads to fibrosis. Given 
that frozen shoulder is normally self-limiting, we hypothesised that the shoulder capsule is ‘primed to resolve’, 
and  that  the  cellular  interactions  between  major  tissue  resident  cell  types  including  fibroblasts  and 
macrophages  might  provide  a  resolving  fibrotic  niche  conducive  to  restoring  tissue  homeostasis. 
  3 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Understanding this cellular basis for successful resolution could help provide the precise biological cues 
required to push persistent fibrotic diseases towards a resolving trajectory.  
 
In this study we used scRNA-seq and multiparameter immunofluorescent histology to discover the cell types 
and microanatomical features that comprise the resolving fibrotic niche in frozen shoulder. We identify a 
population of MERTK+Mφ residing in the capsule lining that are enriched for biological processes associated 
with the modulation of inflammation. Using micro-cultures of patient-derived cells, we demonstrate that 
MERTK+Mφ can restrain the inflammatory phenotype of capsular fibroblasts and reveal a cellular basis for 
resolution of  frozen  shoulder  via  extracellular matrix  remodelling.  Cross-tissue  analysis revealed  that 
MERTK+Mφ in the shoulder capsule and in the knee synovium of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients share a 
common gene expression cassette. Finally, we demonstrate a possible embryonic origin for the cell types 
implicated in the resolution of frozen shoulder, suggesting that the cellular template for resolution of fibrotic 
adult capsular disease is established during foetal development.  
 
RESULTS 
Single cell analysis of the resolving inflammatory fibrotic niche of the shoulder capsule 
The shoulder capsule is comprised of a series of ligaments and a thin synovial layer encapsulating the 
glenohumeral joint. During frozen shoulder, the shoulder joint capsule becomes chronically inflamed and 
fibrotic, leading to significantly restricted range of motion. To understand the cellular basis by which 
inflammatory fibrosis associated with this condition ultimately resolves, we utilised well-phenotyped tissue 
biopsies from non-inflamed comparator and frozen shoulder patients to generate an atlas describing all the 
cell types comprising the adult shoulder capsule. Tissue biopsy samples were collected from the rotator 
interval of the shoulder capsule from patients with a diagnosis of advanced stage frozen shoulder (mean 
duration of symptoms 20 +/- 5 months). Site and age-matched non-inflamed comparator tissue biopsies were 
collected from patients undergoing shoulder arthroplasty. Histological examination of comparator capsule 
identified  a  clearly  demarcated  thin  capsule  lining  and  sparsely  cellular  underlying  sub-lining  region 
comprised of parallel orientated collagen fibres (Figure 1A). Conversely, tissue biopsies from frozen shoulder 
patients exhibited increased cellularity of both lining and sub-lining regions and increased vascularity (Figure 
1A). After integration with Harmony(15), Leiden clustering of 6818 cells isolated from 10 donor tissue biopsies 
(6 comparator, 4 frozen shoulder donors) revealed 5 major populations, each represented in cells from both 
  4 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
comparator and diseased shoulder capsule donors (Figure 1B). Annotation of the stromal cells profiled from 
the adult shoulder capsule revealed that COL1A1+COL3A1+PDGFRB+ fibroblasts were the most abundant 
cell types followed by CD14+CD68+ myeloid cells, CD3+ T cells, PECAM1+ vascular endothelial cells and 
ACTA2+ mural cells (Figure 1C). Frozen shoulder patient tissues showed a trend towards increased 
proportions of lymphoid cells and PECAM+ vascular endothelial cells and a smaller increase in myeloid cells 
relative to comparator tissues. The proportion of fibroblasts was significantly reduced in frozen shoulder 
relative to comparator patient tissues (10% FDR; Figure 1C).  
 
Immune cell atlas of frozen and comparator human shoulder capsule 
A separate analysis of the lymphoid cells revealed two distinct CD3+ T cell clusters, NK cell and B cell clusters 
(Figure 1D).  The CD4+ cluster expressed IL7R, CCR6, TIMP1, CD40LG and LTB; the CD8A/B+ cluster 
expressed GZMK and KLRB1 (Figure 1E). Within the lymphoid cell subset, the relative proportions of the T 
cell and NK cell clusters was similar between comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues while the B 
cells showed a slight but non-credible decrease in frequency in the frozen shoulder samples (Figure 1F). 
Geneset over-representation analysis using gene ontology (GO) Biological Processes (BP) in CD4+ cells 
revealed enrichment for ‘T helper cell differentiation’ and ‘regulation of leukocyte proliferation’; CD8+ cells 
were enriched for leukocyte and natural killer cell mediated cytotoxic processes. Small clusters of NKG7+ 
NK cells expressing cytotoxic molecules including PFR1, GNLY, GZMB and CD79A+ B cells were also 
identified (Figure 1E).  
 
A separate analysis of the myeloid cells identified four clusters in adult shoulder capsule tissues (Figure 1G). 
They included two MERTK+Mφ clusters; a LYVE1high cluster expressing MRC1, MAF, COLEC12 and a 
second  LYVE1low  cluster  expressing  FCGR3A,  ICAM,  TNF,  MMP9  (Figure  1H).  A  MERTKlowCD48high 
macrophage cluster expressing PTGS2, IL1RN and S100A8 and a small cluster of CD48+ monocyte-derived 
dendritic cells (CD1C, AREG, FCER1A) were also identified (Figure 1H). The relative proportions of these 
myeloid clusters did not significantly differ between comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues (Figure 
1I). To investigate possible changes in macrophage phenotype between frozen shoulder and comparator 
tissues, we performed pseudo-bulk based differential gene expression analyses. Grouping of all myeloid cells 
revealed significantly elevated SPP1 expression in comparator relative to frozen shoulder tissues (BH 
adjusted p=2.32x10-9; DESeq2 analysis). Within the macrophage clusters, we detected n=59 genes in the 
  5 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
MERTK+LYVE1lowMφ, n=92 genes in the MERTKlowCD48highMφ and n= 8 genes in the MERTK+LYVE1highMφ 
as  differentially  expressed  between  the  frozen  shoulder  and  comparator  patient  tissues.  Of  note, 
MERTK+LYVE1lowMφ isolated from frozen shoulder patient tissues had significantly higher expression of 
CSF2RA, NFKB1, ITGAX and TNFRSF1B (BH adjusted p<0.001; DESeq2 analysis). MERTK+LYVE1high Mφ 
isolated from frozen shoulder patient tissues showed little difference to those from comparators but had 
significantly lower expression of SPP1 (BH adjusted p<0.001; DESeq2 analysis).  MERTKlowCD48high Mφ 
isolated from frozen shoulder patient tissues had significantly higher expression of CSF2RA, IL1A and IL1B 
(BH adjusted p<0.05; DESeq2 analysis). Collectively, these findings demonstrate that comparator and frozen 
shoulder patient tissues are comprised of heterogeneous myeloid cell populations that have a modified 
transcriptional phenotype in frozen shoulder patients. 
 
Stromal cell atlas of frozen and normal human shoulder capsule 
Fibroblasts exist as distinct subsets with diverse roles in tissue homeostasis, inflammation and fibrosis(16-
19). They constitute the major cell type of the shoulder joint capsule, yet their precise phenotypes have not 
been  described  in  this  tissue.  We  therefore  performed  a  targeted  analysis  of  the 
COL1A1+COL3A1+PDGFRB+ fibroblasts. After integration, six clusters were identified (Figure 1J). These 
included five THY1+PDGFRL+ clusters: (i) “DKK3+FMOD+” cells, (ii) “APOE+” cells expressing CXCL12, (iii) 
“POSTN+ACAN+” cells, (iv) “CXCL2+” cells expressing ARC, (v) “PI16+” sub-population that expressed 
MFAP5. In addition, we found a THY1lowPDGFRLlow “CLIC5+” cluster that also expressed HBEGF+ (Figure 
1K). The relative proportions of fibroblast clusters did not significantly differ between comparator and frozen 
shoulder  patient  tissues  (Figure  1L).  Geneset  over-representation  analysis  revealed  significant  over-
representations for the  gene ontology (GO) biological processes related to collagen fibril and extracellular 
matrix organisation and ‘response to mechanical stimulus’ (DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ clusters), 
chemotaxis  (APOE+  cluster),  apoptotic  processes  (CXCL2+  cluster),  complement  activation,  humoral 
immune response and angiogenesis (PI16+ cluster) and complement activation, TNF production and ion 
channel  binding  (CLIC5+  cluster).  We  performed  pseudobulk-level  differential  expression  analysis  of 
fibroblasts in frozen shoulder relative to comparator patient tissues. Of note, CLIC5, CSF1, ITGA8, SYNOP2 
and CXCL1 showed significantly higher expression in the fibroblasts from frozen shoulder patient tissues (BH 
adjusted p<0.01; DESeq2 analysis). Taken together, these findings suggest that comparator and frozen 
  6 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
shoulder patient tissues are comprised of distinct fibroblast sub-populations which are involved in shaping 
the extracellular environment and the regulation of local tissue inflammation. 
 
Spatial topography of the resolving inflammatory fibrotic niche 
We next used immunofluorescence confocal microscopy to confirm the presence and to characterise the 
microanatomical niches of cell populations identified by single cell analysis. Multiplex immunostaining using 
an extended panel of myeloid markers localised MerTK+Mφ subsets including LYVE1high & LYVE1lowMφ to 
the capsule lining (Figure 2A). A cassette of protein markers further validated these distinct clusters including 
LYVE1, CD163, MRC1 (LYVE1high cluster) and FOLR2, ICAM1, CD83, FCGR3A (LYVE1low cluster), located 
in the capsule lining region, this lining region was expanded in frozen shoulder patient tissues (Figure 2A). 
MerTKlowCD48+Mφ expressing PTGS2, IL1RA and S100A8 were identified in both lining and sub-lining 
regions and were abundant in frozen shoulder patient tissues (Figure 2A).  
 
Quantitative analysis of immunopositive staining revealed an increased number of CD3+ cells in frozen 
shoulder relative to comparator patient tissues (Figure 2B, P=0.0006). CD3+ T cells resided adjacent to 
CD31+ vascular endothelium within the capsule sub-lining (Figure 2B). Immunostaining confirmed the 
presence of CD4+, CD8+ and NK cells in frozen shoulder patient tissues, validating CD127 (CD4+ cluster), 
GZMB, GZMK, CD161 (CD8+ cluster) and CD56+CD57+ (NK cell) populations (Figure 2B).  
 
Capsular fibroblasts also occupied distinct microanatomical niches. PDPN+PDGFRL+ fibroblasts populated 
lining and sub-lining regions, THY1+ (CD90+) fibroblasts predominated in the sub-lining adjacent to vascular 
endothelium (Figure 2C). CXCL12+, POSTN+ and MFAP5+ (PI16+ cluster) fibroblasts localised to sub-lining 
regions adjacent to blood vessels, DKK3+FMOD+ and ARC+ (CXCL2+ cluster) fibroblast subsets were 
identified in both lining and sub-lining regions, CLIC5+HBEGF+ fibroblasts mapped exclusively to the capsule 
lining (Figure 2C). Mural cells (THY1+ACTA2+NOTCH3+) resided adjacent to vascular endothelium (Figure 
2C).  
 
Quantitative analysis of histological tissue sections identified increased cellularity across lining, sub-lining 
and combined regions of frozen shoulder patient tissues (P=0.001, P=0.0003 and P=0.0002 respectively, 
Figure 2D). Immunopositive staining for markers of tissue resident macrophages (CD68, P=0.002), pro-
  7 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
inflammatory macrophages (CD48, P=0.008), fibroblast activation markers (PDPN and CD90, P=0.002 
respectively) and matrix associated proteins (POSTN, CTHRC1, P=0.008 respectively) were all increased in 
frozen shoulder relative to comparator patient tissues (Figure 2D). 
 
Capsular MERTKhigh macrophages have a modulatory phenotype 
To identify candidate myeloid populations implicated in restoring homeostasis during advanced-stage frozen 
shoulder,  we  further  investigated  the  phenotype  and  biological  processes  active  in  these  cells. 
MERTK+LYVE1high macrophages expressed MAF, RNASE1, COLEC12 and SELENOP (Figure 3A). The 
marker genes for this cluster were significantly over-represented for biological processes concerned with 
regulation of humoral immune responses, regulation of complement activation, acute inflammatory response 
and receptor-mediated endocytosis (Figure 3B). Both MERTK+ LYVE1high and LYVE1low macrophage clusters 
expressed  CD163, FOLR2 and MRC1  (Figure 3C). The MERTK+LYVE1low cluster  exhibited a mixed 
phenotype  also  expressing  THBD,  ICAM1,  MMP9  and  TNF.  Biological  processes  significantly  over-
represented in the marker genes for this cluster included regulation of wound healing, cellular response to 
glucocorticoids and leucocyte chemotaxis (Figure 3B). Significant over-representations in MERTKlowCD48+ 
macrophage cluster included those for biological processes associated with alarmins and pro-inflammatory 
mediators including leukocyte chemotaxis and migration, humoral immune response and  response to 
lipopolysaccharide (Figure 3B). These findings support our hypothesis that MERTK+LYVE1high macrophages 
could restrain inflammatory fibrosis in frozen shoulder, providing a resolving fibrotic niche conducive to 
restoring homeostasis. Immunostaining of shoulder capsule tissue sections revealed that MerTK+ cells were 
predominately found in the capsule lining region and were more prevalent in frozen shoulder patient tissues 
(Figure  3D&E,  P=0.005).  We  therefore  investigated  the  cell  types  predicted  to  interact  with 
MERTK+LYVE1high and MERTK+LYVE1low macrophage subsets that could restrain inflammatory fibrosis. 
MerTK, a member of the Tyro-Axl-MERTK (TAM) family of receptor tyrosine kinases is a macrophage 
receptor that mediates efferocytosis(20, 21). Engagement of MerTK by apoptotic cells, GAS6 or protein S 
(PROS1) triggers biochemically distinct responses mediating anti-inflammation and resolution(22). PROS1 
and GAS6 are ubiquitously expressed by fibroblast populations in the shoulder capsule, particularly APOE+ 
and CXCL2+ subsets respectively (Figure 3F). Network Analysis Toolkit for Multicellular Interactions (NATMI) 
analysis(23)  generated  from  comparator  and  frozen  shoulder  sub-populations  (identified  in  Figure  1) 
predicted  specific  interactions  between  MERTK+  macrophages  and  capsular  fibroblasts,  including 
  8 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
PROS1>MERTK (Sender cells>Target cells; APOE+>LYVE1high and APOE+>LYVE1low) and GAS6>MERTK 
(APOE+>LYVE1high, APOE+>LYVE1low, CXCL2+>LYVE1high) (Figure 3G). Immunostaining confirmed the 
proximity of MerTK+ macrophages and GAS6+ and PROS1+ fibroblasts in frozen shoulder patient tissues 
(Figure 3H). These findings further support the hypothesis that cellular interactions between MERTK+ 
macrophages and secreted ligands PROS1 and GAS6 from APOE+ & CXCL2+ fibroblasts could provide a 
resolving fibrotic niche conducive to restoring homeostasis in frozen shoulder.  
 
MerTKhigh and MerTKlow macrophages induce divergent responses in capsular fibroblasts 
from frozen shoulder patients in co-culture 
To investigate how capsular macrophages and stromal cells might function to restore homeostasis during 
frozen shoulder, we explored how the major macrophage subtypes present in the shoulder capsule could 
influence the phenotype of capsular fibroblasts. To model MerTKhigh and MerTKlow macrophage populations 
identified  in  the  shoulder  capsule,  we  treated  monocyte-derived  macrophages  (MDMs)  with  LPS 
(10ng/ml)(24) or Dexamethasone (1uM) to induce MerTKlow or MerTKhigh phenotypes respectively. We directly 
co-incubated ex-vivo capsular fibroblasts from frozen shoulder patient tissues in the presence of either 
MerTKlow or MerTKhigh MDMs for 48 hours and performed bulk RNAseq on FACS sorted fibroblasts. We 
compared the phenotypes of frozen shoulder capsular fibroblasts co-cultured with MerTKlow or MerTKhigh 
MDMs relative to untreated fibroblasts. In total, we identified n=832 genes that showed significant variation 
in expression between untreated,  MerTKlow-MDM co-cultured and MerTKhigh-MDM co-cultured capsular 
fibroblasts (DESeq2, LRT, BH adjusted p<0.01). These genes clustered into four groups with distinct patterns 
of expression across the three conditions, comprising of (i) a set of 345 genes that showed reduced 
expression in the MerTKhigh-MDM co-cultured fibroblasts relative to untreated and MerTKlow-MDM co-cultured 
fibroblasts (group 1), (ii) a set of 311 genes which showed higher expression in MerTKhigh-MDM co-cultured 
fibroblasts (group 2), (iii) a set of 98 genes which showed higher expression in the MerTKlow-MDM co-cultured 
fibroblasts (group 3) and (iv) a set of 78 genes which showed higher expression in the untreated fibroblasts 
(selected examples are shown in Figure 4A). The set of genes downregulated by MerTKhigh MDMs in capsular 
fibroblasts  relative  to  MerTKlow  MDM  co-cultured  and  untreated  fibroblasts  (group  1)  included  pro-
inflammatory  genes  (TNFAIP6,  PTGES,  PTGS2,  IL6),  chemotactic  factors  (CXCL3)  and  matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMP1). We noted that several of these genes, including IL6, MMP1 and CXCL3 showed 
higher expression in the fibroblasts co-cultured with MerTKlow-MDMs relative to the untreated fibroblasts 
  9 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(Figure 4A). Conversely, MerTKhigh MDMs induced a higher expression of genes (group 2) associated with 
maintenance and organization of the extracellular matrix (NEXN, GSN, DPT, TIMP4, SPP1), cell adhesion & 
migration (VIT, EPHB6), cell-matrix interactions (THBS1), immunoregulation (FKBP5) and cell proliferation 
(TRNP1) relative to MerTKlow-MDM co-cultured and untreated capsular fibroblasts (Figure 4A), suggestive of 
a more homeostatic response. Co-incubation with MerTKhigh MDMs also down-regulated TGF responsive 
genes including BMP2, BMP4, TGFBR1 and TGFB2 (group 1, Figure 4A). In support of these findings, the 
set of genes downregulated by co-incubating fibroblasts with MerTKhigh MDMs was over-represented for 
biological processes including positive regulation of type 2 immune response, prostaglandin biosynthesis and 
transport, positive regulation of macrophage activation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition and negative 
regulation of tissue remodelling and apoptotic signalling (group 1, Figure 4B). Conversely, genes up-
regulated by MerTKhigh MDMs in capsular fibroblasts were over-represented for the biological processes 
‘negative  regulation  of  leucocyte  degranulation’,  ‘negative  regulation  of  IL-1  production’  and  those 
associated  with  cell  matrix  adhesion,  phagocytosis  recognition,  extracellular  matrix  assembly  and 
disassembly, tissue remodelling and collagen metabolic processes (group 2, Figure 4B).  
We next assessed if co-culturing MerTKlow or MerTKhigh MDMs with capsular fibroblasts influenced the 
composition of fibroblast sub-populations in vitro. Deconvolution of bulk RNAseq data relative to fibroblast 
populations in Figure 1J predicted that fibroblasts in the resting state (in the absence of MDMs) were 
comprised of DKK3+FMOD+ (median 61%) and POSTN+ACAN+ (median 35%) sub-populations (Figure 4C). 
Co-culture with MerTKhigh MDMs did not induce a significant shift in the predicted composition. In contrast, 
co-culture with MerTKlow MDMs increased the predicted percentage of POSTN+ACAN+ (med 58%) cells and 
decreased the predicted percentage of DKK3+FMOD+ (med 33%) cells.  These findings suggest that under 
homeostatic  and  resolving  inflammatory  milieu,  DKK3+FMOD+  and  POSTN+ACAN+  subsets  are  the 
predominant capsular fibroblasts sub-populations in vitro and that MerTKlow MDMs can promote development 
of a POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast phenotype at the expense of a DKK3+FMOD+ phenotype.  
 
We  applied  NATMI  cell-cell  communication  analysis  to  identify  candidate  signaling  factors  in 
MERTK+LYVE1high macrophages for the induction of cellular and molecular pathways regulating extracellular 
matrix organization and structure in the DKK3+ FMOD+ or POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast populations.  Predicted 
interactions between these cell types were generated from comparator and frozen shoulder sub-populations 
(as per Figure 1), identifying ligand-receptor pairs including F13A1>ITGB1, CD14>ITGB1, C1QB>LRP1, 
  10 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
DCS2>DGS2, EFNB1>EPHB3, APOE>VLDLR, CCL8>ACKR4, CCL13>ACKR4 and LPL>SDC1 (Figure 
4D). Frozen shoulder patient tissues showed higher expression of predicted ligand-receptor pairs between 
the MERTK+LYVE1high macrophages and DKK3+ FMOD+ or POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast populations that 
included CXCL12>ITGB3, FGF18>FGFR1, EFEMP1>EGFR and CXCL12>ITGB1 (Figure 4E). In contrast, 
we noted that comparator tissues showed a higher expression of predicted interactions involving SPP1 
expression by the MERTK+LYVE1high macrophages (Figure 4E). Protein-protein association analysis with 
IntAct(25) identified a possible link between the receptors highly expressed in frozen shoulder patient tissues 
and the transcription factor RUNX2 (Figure 4F). Separately, single-cell gene-regulatory network analysis of 
POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts revealed a correlation between the expression of RUNX2 and genes implicated 
in remodelling and organisation of the extracellular matrix including CDH11, MMP14, MMP13 and SPP1 
(Figure 4G). Collectively these findings suggest that cellular interactions between MERTK+ macrophages 
and DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts may play a role in the resolution of frozen shoulder by 
inducing remodelling of the fibrotic extracellular matrix and restraining the inflammatory phenotype of 
capsular fibroblasts. 
 
Cross-tissue comparison of MERTK+ macrophages in musculoskeletal tissues 
Having identified a potential modulatory phenotype for MERTK+ macrophages in patient shoulder capsule 
tissues, we next compared capsular MERTK+ macrophages with a published dataset of MERTK+ synovial 
tissue macrophages (STM) isolated from rheumatoid arthritis patient cohorts(24). MERTK+ STM sub-
populations were associated with RA disease remission, showed enrichment for negative regulators of 
inflammation and induced repair responses in synovial fibroblasts in vitro(24). The transcriptome correlation 
distance  between  shoulder  capsule  and  knee  synovial  MERTK+  and  MERTK–CD48+  myeloid  sub-
populations is shown in Figure 5A.  MERTK+LYVE1high clusters were common to both tissue types, the 
equivalent MERTK+ cluster in knee RA synovial tissues is annotated FOLR2highLYVE1+ (24) (Figure 5A). We 
applied a transfer-learning approach(26) to annotate the STM populations (Figure 5B) with the cluster labels 
from our shoulder capsule dataset (Figure 1G). The MERTK+LYVE1high cluster in the shoulder capsule 
mapped to TREM2low, TREM2high, FOLR2highLYVE1+ and FOLR2+ID2+ STM sub-populations (Figure 5C).  
Using transferred labels, we investigated the relative expression of myeloid target genes of interest including 
MAF, LYVE1, MERTK, SELENOP, CD48 and MRC1 in the shoulder capsule clusters and their corresponding 
(′) STMs subsets. Within the MERTK+LYVE1high subsets, expression of genes implicated in restoring tissue 
  11 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
homeostasis  including  LYVE1,  MRC1  and  MAF  was  higher  in  shoulder  capsule  cells  relative  to the 
corresponding STMs subset (Figure 5D). To investigate whether these differences were representative of the 
broader MERTK+LYVE1high phenotype we used a gene-cassette comprised of n=224 shoulder capsule 
cluster marker genes for this population (BH adjusted p=1.31x10-199). A lower expression of this gene cassette 
was observed in the predicted knee synovium MERTK+LYVE1high′ and MERTK+LYVE1low′ populations than 
was seen in the corresponding shoulder capsule clusters (Figure 5E). Inspection of the expression of the top 
25 marker of MERTK+LYVE1high shoulder capsule macrophages (Figure 1) confirmed that while this capsule 
population and its predicted MERTK+LYVE1high synovial counterpart had similar levels of expression of 
several marker genes including C1QA, SELENOP, FOLR2 and CD14, the expression of others, including 
LYVE1, MAF and MRC1 was less pronounced in the MERTK+LYVE1high′ STM (Figure 5F). Collectively, these 
findings show that while MERTK+ macrophages in the shoulder capsule and RA synovial patient tissues 
share a common gene expression cassette, MERTK+ macrophages in shoulder capsule patient tissues had 
a higher expression of genes implicated in restoring tissue homeostasis. This data supports the concept that 
this MERTK+ shoulder macrophages may be important for the resolution of frozen shoulder.  
 
The developing shoulder joint provides a cellular template for resolution 
Ontological processes can be recapitulated as part of inflammatory disease pathology(27). To explore if the 
cell types implicated in the resolution of inflammatory fibrosis in frozen shoulder are present during the 
development of the human foetal shoulder joint, we generated an atlas of human developmental shoulder 
tissues at 12, 15 and 17 post conception weeks (pcw). Following integration, clustering of 12,661 cells 
revealed 9 major populations, each represented in cells from 12, 15 and 17 pcw developmental stages 
(Figure 6A). The major cell types identified in our dataset include stromal fibroblasts, myeloid, progenitor and 
differentiated T cells and B cells, vascular endothelial cells, mural and cycling cells (Figure 6A). Lymphoid 
populations were identified in foetal shoulder tissues from 15 and 17pcw developmental stages. These 
included CD3+CD8+ T cells (GZMB+NKG7+), CD3+CD4+ T cells (IL7R+), differentiated MS4A1+ B cells and 
three CD34+ B-cell progenitor clusters (Figure 6A). Clustering of foetal CD68+CD14+ cells revealed 7 distinct 
populations  including  MERTK+LYVE1highM,  MERTK+LYVE1highTIMD4highM,  MERTKlowS100A12+M, 
cycling MKI67+TOP2A+M, MYL4+ myeloid progenitors, CD1C+ monocyte-derived dendritic cells and 
CAECAM8+ neutrophils (Figure 6B).  
 
  12 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Having  identified  interactions  between  MERTK+LYVE1high  macrophages  and  matrix  associated 
DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts induce matrix remodelling in cells from adult tissues, we 
investigated if correlates of these adult cell populations are present during foetal development. We transferred 
the cluster labels from the adult shoulder capsule myeloid clusters (as in Figure 1G) onto foetal myeloid cells, 
revealing  a  mapping  of  MERTK+LYVE1high  adult  macrophages  to  TOP2A+MKI67+,  MERTK+TIMD4+, 
MYL4+, MERTK+LYVE1+ and CD1C+ foetal myeloid sub-populations. This analysis supports that the 
MERTK+LYVE1high macrophage phenotype was common to both adult and foetal shoulder tissues (Figure 
6C).   
 
Analysis  of  foetal  stromal  cells  identified  fibroblast  clusters  including  PI16+MFAP5+,  SCN7A+CCK+, 
WIF1+NR4A2+  SCN7A+IRF1+,  MFAP5+IGFBP4+,  TNMD+ITGA2,  BGN+GEM+,  APOE+FGF7+, 
MKI67+TOP2A+ and  HBEGF+CLU+  (lining  layer)  sub-populations,  COL2A1+ACAN+  chondrocyte and 
TNMD+SCX+ tendon cell clusters (Figure 6D). Transfer of labels from adult fibroblast clusters (Figure 1J) 
onto respective foetal fibroblasts suggested that similar DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast 
populations may be present in foetal shoulder tissues (Figure 6E). The adult DKK3+FMOD+ cluster maps to 
all foetal fibroblast sub-populations, the adult POSTN+ACAN+ cluster maps to all foetal fibroblast sub-
populations except for SCN7A+CCK+ and HBEGF+CLU clusters (Figure 6F).  
 
Finally, we spatially mapped myeloid and fibroblast populations implicated in the resolution of frozen shoulder 
onto foetal shoulder joint tissues to compare the respective topographical niches of these cells with adult 
tissues. Immunostaining confirmed the presence of DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ fibroblasts within the 
developing shoulder capsule (Figure 6G & H). MERTK+LYVE1+MRC1+ macrophages localised to the lining 
region of the developing shoulder capsule  adjacent to CLU+ and GAS6+ fibroblasts (Figure  6I & J). 
Collectively these scRNAseq and spatial findings support an embryonic origin for MERTK+ macrophages 
and DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ fibroblasts in the shoulder capsule. This data supports the conclusion that 
the cell types implicated in the resolution of adult shoulder fibrosis are present during foetal development.  
 
 
 
 
  13 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
DISCUSSION 
Frozen shoulder is a naturally occurring chronic inflammatory fibrotic human disease that is uniquely self-
limiting over time. Analysis of well-phenotyped patient tissues during the advanced resolving disease stage 
provides an opportunity to identify the cell types and molecules implicated in  fibrosis resolution. Using 
integrated scRNA-seq, spatial validation, cross-tissue comparison, and in vitro mechanistic experiments we 
provide new insight into the functional biology of this resolving inflammatory fibrotic niche. Systematic 
analysis of the cell types comprising the adult shoulder capsule during resting and diseased states identified 
distinct subsets of fibroblasts, T cells and macrophages occupying discrete microanatomical niches. Capsular 
fibroblasts share common features with those previously described in synovial tissues(16, 18, 19, 24). We 
identified two matrix-associated capsular fibroblast populations (DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+), two 
chemoattractant clusters (CXCL12+APOE+ and CXCL2+ARC+), vascular interacting (PI16+MFAP5+) and a 
lining layer cluster (CLIC5+HBEGF+). Frozen shoulder patient tissues showed increased cellularity of lining 
and sub-lining regions relative to comparator patient tissues and highly expressed POSTN and CTHRC1 in 
the capsule sub-lining.  Frozen shoulder patient tissues were enriched for T cells which also resided in the 
capsule sub-lining. CD4+CD127+ T cells expressed Th17 associated genes including CCR6, RORA and 
AHR as well as genes associated with a tissue repair phenotype(28-30). This CD4+ subset was distinct from 
CD4+ clusters identified in patient RA synovial tissues(31). CD8+ T cell and NK subsets  expressed 
granzyme, granulysin and perforin molecules akin to the SCT5 subset identified in knee synovial tissues from 
RA patients(31). Future studies are required to determine if these CD8+ cells contribute to resolution of frozen 
shoulder by facilitating the clearance of senescent cells.   
 
MERTKlowCD48+ macrophages from frozen shoulder patients highly expressed IL1A and IL1B although this 
inflammatory macrophage cluster showed reduced SPP1 expression relative to tissues from C-19 and RA 
patients(32).  While  it  is plausible  that  this  population  of  cells may play  a  targetable  role in disease 
pathogenesis, future studies of patient tissues collected during earlier-stage frozen shoulder are essential to 
confirm  if  these  inflammatory  mediators  are  also  active  during  early-stage  disease.  A  population  of 
MERTK+LYVE1+MRC1+ macrophages resident in the capsule lining was enriched for biological processes 
concerned with modulating inflammation including regulation of humoral immune response, complement 
activation, inflammatory response and receptor-mediated endocytosis. These findings support the hypothesis 
that  MERTK+  macrophages  might  restrain  inflammatory  fibrosis,  providing  a  resolving  fibrotic  niche 
  14 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
conducive to restoring homeostasis in frozen shoulder, as observed at other sites of tissue repair (2, 33-35). 
Postulating that capsular MERTK+ macrophages aid resolution of frozen shoulder, we investigated how 
cellular crosstalk between MERTK+ macrophages and capsular fibroblasts from frozen shoulder patients 
could underpin fibrosis resolution. Co-incubation of capsular fibroblasts from frozen shoulder patients with 
MerTKlow MDMs further induced an inflammatory fibroblast phenotype and biological pathways converging 
on chemotaxis and prostanoid biosynthesis. Conversely, co-incubation with MerTKhigh MDMs negatively 
regulated leucocyte degranulation and IL-1 production pathways and upregulated genes and pathways 
associated  with  maintenance  and  organisation  of  the  extracellular  matrix  and  down-regulated  TGF 
responsive genes including BMP2, TGFBR1 and TGFB2 relative to frozen shoulder capsular fibroblasts in 
isolation.  Given  that  TGFβ  induces  the  myCAF  phenotype  in  cancer  associated  fibroblasts(36), 
downregulation of TGFβ signalling could modulate the desmoplastic phenotype of capsular fibroblasts during 
frozen shoulder.  
A recent study reported expansion of the DKK3+ synovial fibroblasts in treatment refractory RA patients(37), 
however the precise function of this fibroblast population remains to be established(38). Interestingly,  
DKK3+FMOD+  fibroblasts  in  the  shoulder  capsule  highly  expressed  inflammation-resolving  receptor 
CMKLR1,  which  we  previously  identified  in  advanced-stage  frozen  shoulder  patient  tissues(14). 
DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts were the predominant populations isolated from patient 
shoulder  capsule  tissues utilised in micro-culture  experiments  with  MERTK+ macrophages.  Predicted 
interactions  between  these  cell  populations  revealed  enrichment  for  ligand-receptor  pairs  including 
F13A1>ITGB1,  CD14>ITGB1,  C1QB>LRP1,  DCS2>DGS2,  EFNB1>EPHB3,  APOE>VLDLR, 
CCL8>ACKR4,  CCL13>ACKR4  and  LPL>SDC1.  Notably,  frozen  shoulder  patient  tissues  showed 
enrichment  for  ligand-receptor  pairs  including  CXCL12>ITGB3,  FGF18>FGFR1,  EFEMP1>EGFR  and 
CXCL12>ITGB1. ITGB1, EPHB3 and SDC1 are matrix-associated molecules. Fibroblast expression of 
integrins including ITGB1 is required to support tissue repair and remodelling(39).  Eph receptors and their 
ligands are essential to the development and function of neuromuscular junctions and regulate actin 
cytoskeletal  dynamics(40,  41).  Syndecans  including  SDC1  mediate  cytoskeletal  organisation  and 
remodelling of the extracellular matrix in cancer(42). LRP1 promotes phagocytic activity, facilitating clearance 
of apoptotic cells(43) required for return towards tissue homeostasis. Interestingly, frozen shoulder patient 
tissues showed depletion for ligand-receptor pairs driving inflammatory processes including LTB>CD40, 
LTB>LTBR and LTB>TNFRSF1A. Protein-protein network association analysis of receptors highly expressed 
  15 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
in frozen shoulder patient fibroblasts identified a possible role for the RUNX2 transcription factor in regulating 
the expression of matrix-associated genes including CDH11, MMP14, MMP13 in these cells. Collectively, 
these experiments using patient-derived cells inform interactions between MERTK+ macrophages and 
matrix-associated DKK3+FMOD+ and POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts play a role in the resolution of frozen 
shoulder  by  inducing  remodelling  of  the  fibrotic  extracellular  matrix  and  restraining  the  inflammatory 
phenotype of capsular fibroblasts, suggesting a pro-resolving role for these cell populations in fibrosis 
resolution.  
 
Synovial tissue macrophages (STM) from RA patients are comprised of distinct subsets, with patients in 
disease remission showing enrichment for MERTK+ clusters including TREM2high and FOLR2highLYVE1+ 
macrophage sub-populations(24). We compared MERTK+ macrophages in the adult shoulder capsule with 
knee RA STMs, identifying a common gene expression cassette between these tissue types. Of note, 
expression of inflammation-regulating genes including LYVE1, MRC1 and MAF was higher in macrophages 
from shoulder capsule relative to STMs, supporting a possible role for this myeloid population in restoring 
homeostasis in frozen shoulder patient tissues. Murine studies highlight perivascular MERTK+LYVE1high 
macrophages maintain tissue homeostasis and prevent arterial stiffness and collagen deposition via MMP9 
dependent proteolysis(44). Depletion of Lyve1highMHCIIlow monocyte derived resident tissue macrophages in 
a  murine  lung  fibrosis  model  exacerbated  vessel  permeability,  immune  cell  infiltration,  and  collagen 
deposition, demonstrating their critical role in restraining inflammation and fibrosis(45). In synovial tissues, 
MERTK+ STM from remission RA patients were potent producers of inflammation-resolving lipids and 
induced repair responses in cultured synovial fibroblasts(24). Collectively, these findings further support the 
ability of MERTK+ macrophages to restrain inflammation and support homeostasis across multiple sub-
tissular niches. Using microcultures of patient-derived cells, Alivernini et al. identified that MERTK+ STM 
induced synovial repair responses in RA patients in remission(24). Our functional experiments revealed that 
MerTKhigh  MDMs  restrained  the  inflammatory  phenotype  of  frozen  shoulder  capsular  fibroblasts  and 
upregulated genes and pathways implicated in extracellular matrix organisation and remodelling which could 
affect fibrosis resolution. Therefore, tissue specific contexts could dictate the nature of this homeostatic 
response. 
 
  16 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Having identified that crosstalk between MERTK+ macrophages and matrix associated fibroblasts underpin 
matrix remodelling in frozen shoulder, we investigated if the cell types implicated in the resolution of adult 
fibrotic capsular disease are present during foetal development. Single-cell analysis of human foetal shoulder 
tissues from 12-17 pcw developmental stages identified MERTK+ macrophage and DKK3+ and POSTN+ 
fibroblast cell populations that were predicted to correspond to equivalent populations identified in the adult 
tissues. In developmental tissues, MERTK+LYVE1+MRC1+ macrophages localised to the shoulder capsule 
lining adjacent to GAS6+ fibroblasts as observed in adult tissues. The identification of MKI67+TOP2A+ 
cycling myeloid cells supports the concept that myeloid cells divide and populate the soft tissues of the 
shoulder joint during foetal development. The developmental origin of macrophages is well documented in 
visceral tissues including brain, heart, lung and liver(46, 47) and the pool of LYVE1+FOLR2+ macrophages 
are maintained through self-renewal with minimal monocyte input(48). However, knowledge of the distinct 
immune populations occupying the soft tissues of the joint during human embryonic development is limited. 
Our findings demonstrate a possible embryonic origin for the cell types implicated in matrix remodelling of 
the fibrotic niche, suggesting that a template to resolve adult fibrotic disease might be laid down during foetal 
development.  As  ontological  processes  are  frequently  recapitulated  in  inflammatory  diseases,  we 
hypothesize that frozen shoulder could exemplify a recapitulation of ontogeny and during disease the re-
activation of developmental cellular programmes could drive fibrosis resolution. 
 
Our study builds upon previous work highlighting the importance of distinct phases of inflammation, resolution 
and remodelling in diseases of musculoskeletal soft tissues(49), generating new therapeutic targets that have 
the potential to exploit the cell-cell interactions we have observed in this uniquely self-limiting musculoskeletal 
condition. We discovered a population of pro-inflammatory MERTKlowCD48+ macrophages that may be 
involved  in  disease  pathogenesis  and  provide  functional  evidence  in  support  of  a  role  for  MERTK+ 
macrophages in disease resolution. We identify MERTK, LYVE1, MRC1 and DKK3+ and POSTN+ fibroblasts 
as specific targets for functional studies of fibrosis in murine models. Therapeutic enhancement of crosstalk 
between populations of resolving MERTK+ macrophages with DKK3+ and POSTN+ fibroblasts to regulate 
inflammation and induce matrix remodelling could accelerate resolution of frozen shoulder and importantly 
resolve persistent inflammatory fibrotic pathologies affecting other tissues.  
 
 
  17 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
MATERIALS & METHODS 
Study approval 
Ethical approval for the use of adult tissues for this study was granted by the local research ethics committee 
(ICECAP study REC reference 18/SC0649, IRAS project ID 257757) and the Oxford Musculoskeletal Biobank 
(19/SC/0134). Full informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki was obtained from all patients.  
Foetal  tissue  samples  were  provided  voluntarily  with  appropriate  informed  consent,  the  Human 
Developmental Biology resource (HDBR) tissue bank operates under Research Ethics Committee approvals 
18/NE/0290 (Newcastle upon Tyne) and 18/LO/0822 (London). 
 
Collection of adult shoulder capsule tissues 
Comparator and frozen shoulder adult tissue biopsies were collected from the rotator interval of the shoulder 
(glenohumeral) joint capsule. Comparator tissues were collected from patients undergoing elective shoulder 
stabilisation (n=8) or shoulder arthroplasty surgical procedures (n=12). Frozen shoulder tissues were 
collected from patients with advanced-stage disease (≥12 months symptom duration) undergoing surgical 
arthroscopic capsular release (n=15).  
 
Processing of adult shoulder capsule tissues for scRNAseq  
To identify the cell types comprising the resolving fibrotic niche, patient shoulder capsule tissue biopsies (n=6 
comparator, n=4 frozen shoulder donors) were disaggregated and digested in DMEM F12 media containing 
4mg/mL Worthington Collagenase II (Lorne) and 1mg/mL DNase (Lorne) at 37C for 90 mins with gentle 
agitation. The cell suspension was filtered and transferred to DMEM containing 10% foetal bovine serum 
(Gibco). 
 
Processing of foetal shoulder joint tissues for scRNAseq 
Foetal upper limbs (n=6) were collected by the Human Developmental Biology Resource (HDBR) team 
following  medical  or  surgical  termination  of  pregnancy.  Developmental  stage  was  determined 
by anthropometric parameters and number of somites present. Samples were stored in L-15 medium at 4ºC 
during shipment, time between collection and subsequent processing was <5h.  Soft tissues of the shoulder 
joint were isolated, disaggregated and digested using Liberase TL (Roche) 0.1mg/ml diluted in DMEM (Gibco) 
over 2h at 37ºC. Liberated cells were collected every 20 minutes during digestion, followed by replacement 
  18 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
of digestion media. The isolated cell suspension was filtered and transferred to DMEM containing 10% foetal 
bovine serum (Gibco). 
 
scRNAseq of adult and developmental shoulder tissues  
Single cell suspension samples were stained with 7-AAD dye (Bio-Legend 420404) for live/dead sorting on 
a SONY SH800 cell sorter. The density of cell suspensions was determined with the Bio-Rad TC20 
Automated Cell Counter before loading 20,000 – 30,000 cells per sample onto a Next GEM Chip G and 
running on the 10x Chromium Controller. Single cell gene expression libraries were prepared using the 10x 
Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3' Reagent Kits v3.1 following manufacturer user guide (CG000204). The 
final gene expression libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq6000 platform (v1.5 chemistry, 28bp 
Read1 and >91bp Read2) to a minimum depth of 50,000 reads per cell. 
 
Processing and immunostaining of adult shoulder capsule tissues  
Shoulder capsule tissue biopsies collected from the rotator interval of comparator and frozen shoulder 
patients were immersed in 10% buffered formalin for a minimum of 48hrs. After fixation, samples were 
processed using a Leica ASP300S tissue processor and embedded in paraffin wax. Tissues were sectioned 
at 6m using a rotary RM2135 microtome (Leica Microsystems Ltd) onto adhesive glass slides and baked at 
60°C for 30 min and 37°C for 60 min. We used immunohistochemistry to validate key sub-population markers 
for macrophages and fibroblasts identified in Figure 1. Comparator and frozen shoulder capsular tissue 
sections were obtained through deparaffinization and target retrieval steps (high pH, heat-mediated antigen 
retrieval) using an automated PT Link (Dako). Antibody staining was performed using the EnVision FLEX 
visualization system with an Autostainer Link 48 (Dako). Antibody binding was visualized using FLEX 3,3′-
diaminobenzidine (DAB) substrate working solution and hematoxylin counterstain (Dako). For negative 
controls, the primary antibody was substituted for universal isotype control antibodies: cocktail of mouse 
immunoglobulin G (IgG1), IgG2a, IgG2b, IgG3, and IgM (Dako) and rabbit immunoglobulin fraction of serum 
from nonimmunized rabbits, solid-phase absorbed (Dako). After staining, slides were taken through graded 
industrial methylated spirit and xylene, mounted in DPX mounting medium (Fischer Scientific) and imaged 
on a Brightfield microscope (Olympus). Images were acquired on a MOTIC slide scanner (Leica Biosystems) 
by a single blinded investigator. Image analysis was conducted using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health) 
as previously described(50). For each sample, immunopositive staining was normalized to the number of 
  19 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
hematoxylin-counterstained nuclei within the field of view. Data are presented as % area immunostaining. 
Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism, version 9.2.0 (GraphPad Software). Statistically 
significant differences in immunopositive staining were calculated using the Pairwise Mann Whitney U test. 
P <0.05 was considered statistically significant.  
 
Validation & spatial mapping of macrophage & fibroblast subsets in adult capsular tissues 
We performed multiplex immunostaining to validate the phenotype of identified macrophage and fibroblast 
clusters and to identify the topographical niches these cells occupy in comparator and frozen shoulder adult 
capsular tissues using a previously validated protocol(49). After antigen retrieval steps, tissues were blocked 
in 5% normal goat serum (Sigma) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 30 min in a humid chamber at room 
temperature. Sections were incubated with the primary antibody cocktail diluted in 5% normal goat serum in 
PBS for 2.5 hrs at room temperature. Sections were washed with PBS–Tween 20 (PBST) and incubated in 
the secondary antibody cocktail, each diluted 1:200 in 5% normal equine serum (Sigma) in PBS for 2.5 hours. 
The secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor goat anti-mouse IgG2a or IgG2b or goat anti-rabbit IgG (Life 
Technologies) and goat anti-mouse IgG1 (Southern Biotech). After washing, sections were incubated in 2 
mM POPO-1 nuclear counterstain (Life Technologies) diluted in PBS containing 0.05% saponin (Sigma) for 
20 min. Tissue autofluorescence was quenched with a solution of 0.1% Sudan Black B (Applichem) in 70% 
ethanol for 3 mins. Slides were mounted using fluorescent mounting medium (VectaShield), sealed, and 
stored at 4°C until image acquisition. For negative controls, the primary antibody was substituted for universal 
isotype  control antibodies:  cocktail  of  mouse  IgG1,  IgG2a,  IgG2b,  IgG3,  and  IgM  (Dako)  and rabbit 
immunoglobulin fraction of serum from non-immunized rabbits, solid-phase absorbed (Dako). Images were 
acquired on a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope using a 40x oil immersion objective (numerical aperture, 
0.95). The fluorophores POPO-1, Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 568, and Alexa Fluor 633 were excited using 
the 405, 488, 561, and 633nm laser lines, respectively. To minimize bleed-through, all channels were 
acquired sequentially. Averaging was set to 2 and the pinhole was set to about 1 airy unit. Two-dimensional 
image reconstructions were created using ZEN software (Zeiss). 
 
Validation T cell subsets in frozen shoulder patient tissues  
Multiplex ChipCytometry staining was used for immunophenotyping of T cells populations in frozen shoulder 
patient tissues using a previously validated protocol(51). Cryosections were cut directly onto APES-coated 
  20 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
coverslips (Sigma-Aldrich) and fixed immediately using freshly prepared 0.1 M phosphate-buffered 4% 
paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich)  or  Zellkraftwerk  fixation  buffer  (Zellkraftwerk)  for  10  min  at  room 
temperature. After washing in PBS, sections on coverslips were assembled into tissue chips (ZellSafe Tissue 
– Chips; Zellkraftwerk). Tissue sections were blocked by incubating in 5% normal goat serum (Thermo 
Fischer Scientific) in PBS for 1h at room temperature. Immunostaining was performed at room temperature 
for 30 min using 0.5 ml of Ab solution per chip. Antibody cocktails were diluted in PBS alone or PBS containing 
2% normal goat serum. Markers were acquired in iterative rounds of photobleaching, staining, and imaging 
including CD45, CD3, CD4, CD8, GZMB, GZMK, CD127, CD40LG, CD18, CD161, CD2, CD5, FAP, CD31. 
Images were downloaded from the proprietary software (Zellscanner App, Zellkraftwerk Gmbh) as single 
marker 16-bit greyscale tif files. An outlier filter was applied to reduce signal noise (median, radius 0.5) and 
images were cropped, merged and colourised in FIJI as previously described(52).  
 
Processing and immunostaining of developmental shoulder joint tissues  
Foetal shoulders were fixed in 10% formalin for a minimum of 48hrs. Samples >10 post conceptional weeks 
were  decalcified  with  0.5M  EDTA  solution  for  15-30  days  (depending  upon  developmental  stage). 
Subsequently, samples were processed into paraffin using a tissue processor (Tissue TeK VIP 6 Processor, 
Sakura) and embedded in paraffin blocks in anteroposterior orientation. Tissues were sectioned at 6m as 
per adult tissues. Multiplex immunostaining was performed to validate the phenotype and topographical 
niches of the major cell types comprising the shoulder joint capsule during development. Sections of foetal 
shoulder tissues were baked overnight at 60°C. Slides were transferred to xylene for de-waxing followed by 
a series of rehydration steps in ethanol solutions (100%, 95%, 70%, 50%). Each step was repeated twice for 
5 minutes each, followed by 2 washing steps in 1x PBS. The slides were then permeabilised for 10 minutes 
in 0.3% Triton X-100 and washed further in 1x PBS for 5 minutes. Heat Induced Epitope Retrieval (HIER) 
was conducted with the NxGen decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical) with both Citrate (pH 6.0) and Tris 
(pH 9.0) antigen retrieval solutions. The decloaking chamber is programmed to incubate slides in Citrate 
solution (Vector Labs, H3300) for 20 minutes reaching 110ºC and 6.1 PSI, which was maintained for 4 
minutes before cooldown was initiated. Slides were transferred to a Tris solution for 20 minutes followed by 
an additional 10 minutes at room temperature (RT). Tissue slides were blocked with a 3% BSA (Merck, 
A7906) and 10% Donkey serum (Bio-Rad, C06SB) solution overnight at 4°C. Slides were washed in 1xPBS 
for 10 minutes and then stained with DAPI (Thermo, D3571) for 15 minutes. Slides were washed in 1xPBS 
  21 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
for 5 minutes and coverslipped with 75µl of mounting media (50% glycerol – Sigma, G5516 and 4% propyl 
gallate – Sigma, 2370).  
 
Cell DIVE Imaging of developmental shoulder joint tissues 
The GE Cell DIVE system was used to image all developmental FFPE slides using the ImageApp imaging 
software(53, 54). An initial image using a 10x objective of the entire tissue allows for ROI selection. The 
background and innate autofluorescence of the tissue are captured during the initial 20x imaging round. This 
uses the FITC, Cy3, Cy5 channels as well as the DAPI signal to also create a virtual H&E image. Background 
imaging is used to subtract autofluorescence from all subsequent rounds of staining. Slides were de-
coverslipped in 1xPBS prior to staining. Each staining round consisted of a master mix of 3 antibodies 
prepared in antibody diluent (3% BSA, 1xPBS). The initial round used primary antibodies which were 
incubated in the dark for 1 hr at room temperature followed by 3x washes in 1xPBS. Secondary antibodies 
raised in Donkey were then incubated for an additional  hour at room temperature which were either 
conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, 555 or 647. Each subsequent staining round used directly conjugated 
antibodies to either of these dyes. Fluorophores were bleached between each staining round using NaHCO  
3
(0.1M, pH 11.2. Sigma - S6297) and 3% H O  (Merck – 216763). Fresh bleaching solutions were prepared, 
2 2
and slides were bleached 3 times (15 minutes each) with a 1 minute 1xPBS wash in between bleaching 
rounds. Slides were re-stained for DAPI for 2 minutes and washed in 1xPBS for 5 minutes before imaging 
the dye-inactivated round as the new background round (for subsequent background subtraction). DAPI 
staining between imaging rounds assists in image registration and alignment. Slides were multiplexed with 
the next panel of three markers with iterative staining, bleaching and imaging. A negative control slide stained 
with  isotype-matched  antibodies  was  used  at  the  same  concentration  as  the  corresponding  primary 
antibodies and using the same exposure settings. QuPath software 0.3 was used for image visualisation and 
the isotype controls were contrast-matched to samples stained with primary antibodies for comparison(55). 
 
Isolation of monocyte-derived macrophages from blood  
Non-clinical blood cones were provided by the NHSBT and approved under REC number 11/H0771/7. PBMC 
were isolated using a density gradient (Histopaque, Sigma) and depleted from red blood cells using ACK 
lysis buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific). CD14+CD16+ cells were isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells using EasySep™ Human Monocyte Enrichment Kit without CD16 Depletion (Stemcell) according to the 
  22 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were differentiated into macrophages in complete media (RPMI, Gibco + FCS, 
Gibco  +1%Penstrep,  Sigma)  containing  5%  FCS  and  additional  100ng/mL  M-CSF  (PeproTech)  with 
incubator conditions 37°C/5% CO2. On day 6, macrophages were harvested using cell lifters and plated in 
the appropriate plate at a density of 500,000 cells/well in a 6-well plate or 100,000 cells/well in a 96-well plate, 
in 3ml and 200uL complete media, containing 3% FCS respectively and rested for 2 days. On day 8, cells 
were washed and stimulated with 10ng/ml LPS (Invivogen) or 1uM Dexamethasone (Sigma) for 72 hrs. Doses 
of reagents used were adapted from a previously published protocol(24).  
 
Characterisation of Dexamethasone and LPS treated MDMs by flow cytometry 
To characterize the blood cone derived macrophages after stimulating with Dexamethasone or LPS, protein 
expression was measured by flow cytometric analysis. For this experiment 4 different donors were used in 
independent experiments.  Monocytes were isolated from blood cones and treated with M-CSF for 5 days as 
described  above.  After  plating  to  1x106,  cells  were  rested  for  2  days  and  stimulated  with  LPS  or 
Dexamethasone to induce respective MerTKlow or MerTKhigh phenotypes as above. Macrophages were 
dissociated from the plate with Accutase for 10 minutes and dissociated using a cell lifter to harvest for flow 
cytometry. The cells were stained with antibodies against the surface markers MerTK, CD163, CD206, 
TREM2, CD14, LYVE-1 and CD48 (1:100 dilution). In addition, a Live/dead stain (1:500) and FC block (1:100) 
was added to the mixture. After 20 minutes of staining at 4 degrees, cells were spun down, and supernatant 
was discarded before cells were fixed using 4% PFA in PBS at RT for 20 minutes. After spinning and 
discarding of the supernatant, cells were permeabilized for 15 minutes with 1x BD Perm/Wash™ buffer and 
stained with antibody against CD68 for 20 minutes at RT. Cells were washed in permeabilization buffer and 
resuspended in FACS buffer (10% FBS in PBS) before running on an LSRII Flow Cytometer. Data was 
analysed using FlowJo V10. Data were expressed as geometric mean of staining intensity and were 
normalised within donors relative to control (minus dexamethasone or LPS stimulation). Data were analysed 
in Graphpad Prism 9.2.0. and are expressed as SEM p<0.05 with n=4 donors, statistical test used was an 
unpaired t-test.  
 
Coculture of MerTKhigh and MerTKlow MDMs with primary capsular fibroblasts  
Monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs, n=3 donors) in 6-well plates were stimulated for 72 hours with the 
previously described conditions to induce MerTKhigh or MerTKlow populations. After washing with PBS, 
  23 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
capsule-derived fibroblasts isolated from frozen shoulder patients (n=3 donors) were added to MerTKhigh or 
MerTKlow incubations at a density of 200,000 cells/well. Fibroblasts and MDMs were co-cultured for 48 hrs in 
complete media containing 3% FCS prior to harvest and sorting. After 48 hours, cells were incubated with 
accutase for 10 minutes and vigorously resuspended. Media was added and remaining adherent cells 
detached by scraping. A single cell suspension was obtained after putting cells through a 70m cell strainer 
and resuspended in Facs buffer containing 1% BSA 0.1mg/ml DNase in PBS. Cells were stained with 
antibodies PDPN, CD90, CD45, CD14 (1:200 dilution) to distinguish between fibroblasts and MDMs. Directly 
co-cultured MDMs and fibroblasts were sorted on a BD Aria III with Diva 8.01 software. Fibroblasts 
(PDPN+CD90+CD31-) and MDMs (CD45+CD14+) were sorted into RLT Lysis buffer (Qiagen). RNA from 
sorted capsular fibroblasts was extracted using the RNEasy microprep kit (Qiagen) according to the 
manufacturers protocol.  
 
Bulk RNA-seq of capsular fibroblasts co-cultured with MDMs 
Total RNA was quantified using Quant-it RiboGreen RNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen), and the integrity assessed 
by the 4200 Tapestation system (Agilent). PolyA+ mRNA was enriched and purified from 100ng high-quality 
total RNA (RIN >9) using NEBNext Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module (E7490L). Generation of double 
stranded cDNA and library construction were performed using the NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA Library 
Prep  Kit  for  Illumina  (E7760L),  with  custom  adapters  and  barcode  tags  (dual  indexing,  based  on 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6750-13-104). Indexed libraries were multiplexed based on fluorescent-
based quantification. The final size distribution of the multiplexed pool was determined using Tapestation and 
quantified by Qubit assay (Thermo Fisher), before sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq6000 v1.5 in 150bp 
paired-end mode. Data from the NovaSeq6000 were demultiplexed using bcl2fastq (Illumina) version 2.20.0. 
Cassette scores were calculated using addModuleScore function and the log normalised count of all 
MERTKhigh markers. 
 
Computational Analysis of single-cell RNA-sequencing data 
Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data from frozen shoulder and comparator adult tissues 
Single cell RNA sequencing data was aligned to human genome using 10x Genomics Cell Ranger version 
6.1. and 2020-A Reference annotations (GRCh38, GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98). Ambient background RNA 
was removed using CellBender (version 0.2.0; droplets included=10,000, fpr=0.01, epochs=150). A total of 
  24 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
n=13194 cells were identified for downstream analysis. Doublets were determined using Scrublet (version 
0.2.3) at an expected doublet rate of 0.05(56). The count matrix was transformed into a Seurat object for 
downstream analysis(57). Additionally, we removed cells that had abnormally low or high gene counts (<300 
or >6500 n_Feature) and high mitochondrial gene expression (> 10% mitochondrial genes, n=5818 cells 
removed). Cell cycle scores were computed using curated gene sets(58) and the addModuleScore function 
provided in Seurat. Cell counts were log normalised, scaled, and n=3000 highly variable genes (HVG) were 
selected using the VST method and used for principal component analysis (PCA, n=50 PCs retained). We 
corrected the latent space using Harmony by the condition (i.e., comparator and frozen shoulder) of the 
samples (n=15 components retained)(15). Downstream analyses were performed using the Cellhub workflow 
(https://github.com/sansomlab/cellhub). Nearest neighbour graphs were computed with the HNSW algorithm 
(Euclidean distance, k=20) and clustering performed with the Leiden algorithm. We applied additional filters 
to remove clusters of cells with low UMI (n_Count < 10000) and gene count (n_Features < 1000), and highly 
expressed hemoglobin markers (HBA, HBB, HBG) (n=558 cells). The remaining clusters of high-quality cells 
(n=6818 in total) were assigned to stromal, myeloid or lymphoid cell type “regions” based on singleR cell type 
predictions(59) (version 1.06) and expression of known cell-type specific marker genes (CD34 PECAM–, 
stromal; CD14, myeloid cells; CD3, lymphoid cells). The count matrices for each of the cell-type regions were 
extracted and separately re-analysed using the workflow described above. For the stromal cells we used 
n=1500 HVG, n=50 PCA components, n=14 harmony components and a clustering resolution of 0.3. For the 
myeloid cells we used n=400 HVG, n=50 PCA components, n=11 harmony components and a clustering 
resolution of 0.2. We removed a cluster of cells that consisted mainly doublets (score ≥ 0.4; n=9 cells 
removed). For the lymphoid cells n=1000 HVG, n=50 PCA components, n=11 harmony components and a 
clustering resolution of 0.2 was used. The markers of each cluster were identified using a Wilcox test (BH 
adjusted p≤0.05).  
 
Pseudobulk-level differential expression analysis  
Within cell type differential expression analyses of the adult single cell dataset (comparator vs frozen 
shoulder) were performed at pseudo-bulk level. Pseudo-bulks were created by summing gene counts within 
cluster for each sample using Muscat. Differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2(60) 
(version 1.26.0; ashr shrinkage, Wald test). Genes expressed (≥10 counts) in n ≥x samples where x was 
  25 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
equal to the number of biological replicates in any of the condition groups were retained for differential 
expression analysis. 
 
Pathway analysis  
To further dissect the functionality of genes and gene sets that had been identified from the sequencing data, 
we performed pathway over-representation analysis using Gene Ontology database(61, 62) and Canonical 
pathway  databases  (BioCarta,  http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Pathways/BioCarta_Pathways;  KEGG, 
http://www.pathway.jp;  Pathway  Interaction  Database,  PID, http://pid.nci.nih.gov;  Reactome, 
http://www.reactome.org  and  WikiPathways, https://www.wikipathways.org/)  with  gsFisher 
(https://github.com/sansomlab/gsfisher) and ClusterProfiler(63).For the analysis of the single cell sequencing 
data, we used marker genes (Wilcox, BH adjusted p≤0.1) representative of each cluster and restricted the 
gene universe to genes that were detected in a minimum of 10 percent of cells. For the bulk sequencing data, 
we used the differentially expressed genes (DESeq2, BH adjusted p≤0.05) and restricted the gene universe 
to include genes that were in the DEG analysis. Significant pathways were ranked and selected by their 
magnitude of the odds ratio, which was evaluated using Fisher Exact test and corrected for multiple testing 
using Benjamini Hochberg. 
 
Cell-cell interaction analysis 
We  identified  receptor-ligand  interactions  between  cell  clusters  using  Network  Analysis  Toolkit  for 
Multicellular Interactions (NATMI)(23), we retained only fully validated interactions from literature and the 
constituent ligand and receptor genes that are expressed at a detectable level (>5% within cluster).  
 
Protein-protein and gene regulatory network analyses 
Protein association network analysis was performed using Intact(25) (release 242) and the resulting network 
graph was filtered to retain nodes with a maximum of two degrees of separation. Single-cell gene regulatory 
network analysis of the fibroblasts was performed using pySCENIC(64) (version 0.11.2) and the elicited 
biomolecular interaction networks and regulons were visualized using  iRegulon(65) and Cytoscape(66) 
(version 3.9.1) We used logistic regression to model the cassette score distribution in macrophage clusters 
between adult shoulder capsule and RA synovial tissues, which was statistically evaluated using Wald test. 
 
  26 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Comparison of macrophages from frozen shoulder and knee synovium 
Data (Seurat Object) for macrophages from the knee synovium was a gift from the corresponding authors of 
#PMID:32601335(24) and can be retrieved from ArrayExpress under the accession E-MTAB-8322. We 
retained 19078 genes that had matching Ensembl ID in both datasets. We projected the annotations of the 
reference data, i.e., the adult capsule on to the cells from the knee synovium through semi-supervised 
machine learning using scANVI of scArches(26) with condition as the batch variable. The reference data and 
query data were both trained for 400 epochs. We accepted the predicted label of each query cell based on 
the highest score for the cluster (we observed minimal differences when a threshold of 0.6 or 0.8 was applied, 
data not shown).  
 
Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data from foetal tissues 
Single cell RNA sequencing data from foetal tissues were analysed using the same workflow as described in 
the adult atlas analysis section except that use of an integration algorithm was found not to be necessary. 
The foetal data comprised of n=17718 cells, of which 4538 cells were removed for abnormal gene count and 
high mitochondria gene expression (threshold as before). We selected n=6000 HVG and utilised the top n=16 
PCs for computation of the UMAP and nearest neighbour graph. After removing a further n=519 cells that 
had a low gene count), low UMI count (threshold as before), HBB+ cells, we retained 12,661 high quality 
cells. The count matrices for each of the cell-type regions were extracted and separately re-analysed. For 
the stromal cells we used n=2000 HVG, n=14 PCs and a clustering resolution of 0.7. For the myeloid cells 
we used n=500 HVG, n=11 PCs and a clustering resolution of 0.6. For T cells n=1000 HVG, n=7 PCs and a 
clustering resolution of 0.2 was used. For B cells n=500 HVG, n=7 PCs and a clustering resolution of 0.3 was 
used. The markers of each cluster were identified using a Wilcox test (BH adjusted p-value≤0.05).  
 
Computational Analysis of Bulk RNA-sequencing data 
 
Data processing and differential expression analysis 
We assessed the quality of the paired-end bulk RNA sequencing data using fastQC and generated count 
matrix using release 32 of the Gencode transcripts reference panel (Grch38.p13) with Salmon(67)(version 
1.5.2). We performed dimension reduction (plotPCA; DESeq2) to determine the validity of the sample labels, 
and the sources of variation, and to visualize the structure of the data after the batch effect (stimulation) was 
  27 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
adjusted using Limma(68) (removeBatchEffect). Only genes that were expressed (counts≥10) in all the 
samples in any of the condition groups were kept for analysis (n=17544 genes retained). Differential 
expression analysis was performed using DESeq2(60) (version 1.34.0 apeglm shrinkage), and the statistical 
significance between the full model (~ sample + stimulation) and the reduced model (~ sample) was evaluated 
using LRT.  
 
Cell type deconvolution analysis 
Deconvolution of the bulk RNA sequencing data to the adult single cell sequencing data was performed using 
MuSiC(69) (version 0.2.0). We used expression dataset objects from the raw count matrix of the single cell 
data  using  BisqueRNA(70)  (version  1.0.5)  and  from  the  Bulk  RNA  sequencing  data  using 
Biobase(71)(version 2.54.0). Differences in proportion of subtypes of cultured fibroblasts were evaluated for 
statistical significance using Kruskal-Wallis, followed by pairwise post-hoc test with Dunn’s.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  28 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
FIGURES 
Figure 1. 
 
  29 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 1. Cell types comprising the resolving inflammatory fibrotic niche.  
(A) Representative images showing Haematoxylin & Eosin staining of sections of comparator and frozen 
shoulder patient tissues. Distinct lining and sub-lining regions of the capsule are identified, frozen shoulder 
tissue sections show increased cellularity and vascularity relative to comparator tissues. Nuclear counterstain 
is violet, scale bar=50m. (B-L) scRNA-seq analysis of adult shoulder capsule from tissue biopsy samples 
collected from comparator (n=6) and frozen shoulder (n=4) patients. (B) UMAP shows the major cell types 
identified (C) The boxplots show the relative frequencies of the cell types in comparator and frozen shoulder 
patient tissues highlighting credible differences in the proportion of fibroblasts between these sample types 
(indicated by *). (D) The 4 identified lymphoid clusters. (E) Violin plots of selected lymphoid cluster marker 
genes. (F) Relative frequencies of lymphoid clusters in comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues. (G) 
The 4 myeloid clusters identified (resolution=0.2). (H) Selected myeloid cluster marker genes. (I) Relative 
frequencies of myeloid clusters in comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues. (J) The 6 identified 
fibroblast clusters (resolution=0.3). (K) Selected fibroblast cluster marker genes. (L) The relative frequencies 
of the fibroblast clusters in comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues. The credibility of differences in 
composition between the frozen shoulder and comparator samples was determined for each cluster (C), (F), 
(I) and (L) with scCODA(72) (10% FDR). Violin plots in (E), (H), (K) show log-normalized expression values 
of selected cluster marker genes. Only significant cluster marker genes are shown (Wilcoxon tests, BH 
adjusted P-values<0.05). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  30 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 2. 
 
  31 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 2. Spatial topography of the resolving fibrotic niche. (A) Panel shows representative confocal 
images of immunostaining for CD68 and a wider panel of macrophage markers confirming the topographical 
niches of MerTK+LYVE1high, MerTK+LYVE1low and MerTKlowCD48+ macrophage subsets in sections of 
comparator  and  frozen  shoulder  patient  tissues.  MerTK+LYVE1highMRC1+CD163+  and 
MerTK+LYVE1lowFOLR2+ICAM1+CD83+FCGR3A+  subsets  predominate  in  the  capsule  lining, 
MerTKlowCD48+PTGS2+S100A8+IL1RA+  macrophages  occupy  lining  and  sub-lining  regions.  Cyan 
represents  POPO-1  nuclear  counterstain,  scale bar=20m.  (B)  Graph  shows  quantitative  analysis  of 
immunostaining for CD3 in comparator (C) and frozen shoulder (FS) patient tissue sections. Panel shows 
representative ChipCytometry images of T cells in sections of frozen shoulder patient tissues, T cells reside 
adjacent to vascular endothelium (CD31+). Panels show staining combinations for CD4+ T cells (CD127+), 
CD8+ T cells (CD161+ GZMK+) and NK cells (CD56+ GZMB+), nuclei counterstained cyan/blue. (C) 
Representative confocal images showing labelling for a cassette of fibroblast markers confirming the 
topographical niches of identified fibroblast sub-populations from Figure 1J in sections of comparator and 
frozen  shoulder  patient  tissues.  Sub-population  markers  include  DKK3+FMOD+,  CXCL12+PTGDS+, 
POSTN+CTHRC1+,  ARC+CHI3L1+,  MFAP5+  and  CLIC5+HBEGF+PRG4+.  Cyan  represents  POPO-1 
nuclear counterstain, scale bar=20m. (D) Graphs show quantitative analysis of cellularity (total cellularity 
and cellularity localised to lining and sub-lining regions) and immunostaining for markers of macrophages 
(CD68, CD48) fibroblast activation (PDPN, CD90) and matrix associated markers (POSTN, CTHRC1) in 
sections of tissue biopsies collected from comparator (C) and frozen shoulder (FS) patients. Statistically 
significant differences were calculated using pairwise Mann-Whitney U tests. Bars represent median values. 
*** P<0.001, ** P<0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  32 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 3. 
 
  33 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 3. Capsular MERTKhigh macrophages have a modulatory phenotype. 
(A) The heatmap shows the top 20 marker genes for the capsular myeloid cell clusters (Wilcoxon test, BH 
adjusted P<1x10-9. (B) Geneset over-representation analysis of gene ontology (GO) Biological Processes 
(BP) in the capsular myeloid clusters (one-sided Fisher tests, BH adjusted P<0.05. (C) UMAPs show the 
expression of modulatory macrophage genes including MERTK, LYVE1, CD163, TREM2, FOLR2 and MRC1 
in capsular macrophages, localising these markers to MERTK+LYVE1high and MERTK+LYVE1low clusters. 
(D) Representative images of 3,3′-diaminobenzidine immunostaining (brown) for MERTK in sections from 
comparator and frozen shoulder patient tissues, staining is localised to the capsule lining region. Nuclear 
counterstain is haematoxylin, scale bar=50m. (E) Graph shows quantitative analysis of MERTK+ cells in 
comparator (C) and frozen shoulder (FS) patient tissues, bars show median values. Statistically significant 
differences were calculated using Kruskal-Wallis tests with pairwise post hoc Mann-Whitney U tests, **P< 
0.01. (F) Violin plots show expression of MERTK ligands GAS6 and PROS1 in capsular fibroblast sub-
populations. (G) Selected predicted ligand-receptor interactions between sender population (PROS1+ or 
GAS6+ fibroblasts) and receiver population (MERTK+LYVE1high or MERTK+LYVE1low macrophages) are 
show. Predictions were generated from comparator (n=6 capsule biopsies) and frozen shoulder (n=4 capsule 
biopsies), sub-populations as in Figure 1G (NATMI analysis; BH adjusted P<0.05). (H) Representative 
immunofluorescence images of the lining region of frozen shoulder patient tissues, showing the topographical 
proximity of MERTK with associated ligands GAS6 and PROS1. Fibroblast markers include CLIC5, PDPN, 
AXL. Scale bar=20m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  34 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 4. 
 
  35 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 4. MerTKlow and MerTKhigh macrophages induce divergent responses in capsular fibroblasts 
from frozen shoulder patients.  
(A) Heatmap showing selected genes that showed significant variance in expression between capsular 
fibroblasts from frozen shoulder patients co-incubated with MerTKhigh, MerTKlow MDMs or fibroblasts in 
isolation (DESeq2, LRT test, BH adjusted P<0.05). (B) Dot plot shows GO biological processes over-
represented in the sets of genes down-regulated in capsular fibroblasts by incubation with MerTKhigh MDMs 
(group 1) or up-regulated by incubation with MerTKhigh MDMs (group 2). (C) The boxplots show the predicted 
proportions of fibroblast subsets identified in the single-cell analysis (Figure 1J) present in the untreated, 
MerTKhigh-MDM  co-cultured  and  MerTKlow-MDM  co-cultured  fibroblasts  (n=3  donors  in  independent 
experiments, bars show median value; deconvolution performed with MuSiC). (D) Selected predicted ligand-
receptor interactions between MerTK+LYVE1+ myeloid and DKK3+FMOD+ or POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast 
sub-populations generated from differentially expressed genes from comparator (n=6 capsule biopsies) and 
frozen shoulder (n=4 capsule biopsies), sub-populations as in Figure 1 (NATMI analysis). (E) The scatter plot 
shows the expression change of predicted ligand-receptor interactions between MerTK+LYVE1+ myeloid 
and DKK3+FMOD+ or POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblast sub-populations in frozen shoulder relative to comparator 
patient tissues. (F) Protein-protein network association analysis of receptors (blue) highly expressed in frozen 
shoulder patient fibroblasts identified a candidate interaction with RUNX2 (analysis performed with IntAct). 
(G) Single-cell PySCENIC(64) gene regulatory network analysis of fibroblasts (Figure 1J, all clusters) 
identified a connection between the expression of RUNX2 and matrix associated genes including CDH11, 
MMP14, MMP13 and SPP1 (pink) in POSTN+ACAN+ fibroblasts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  36 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of MERTKhigh macrophage clusters in shoulder capsule and knee RA synovial 
tissues. (A) Dendrogram shows the transcriptomic Spearman correlation distance between human myeloid 
populations in comparator and frozen shoulder capsule tissues (blue) relative to knee RA synovial tissue 
macrophages (STMs, red) from Alivernini et al. (2020). In STMs, the MERTK+LYVE1+ cluster is annotated 
FOLR2highLYVE1+. (B) UMAP shows the Alivernini et al. (2020 STM cells with labels transferred from the 
myeloid clusters identified in adult shoulder capsule tissues (Figure 1G) (scArches analysis) (C) The Sankey 
plot shows the mapping between the original STM sub-populations clusters identified by Alivernini et al. 
  37 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
(2020) (left) and the transferred myeloid labels from the adult shoulder capsule tissues (MERTK–CD48+, 
MERTK+LYVE1low, MERTKLYVE1high, CD1C+) (right). (D) The box plots show the normalized expression of 
myeloid genes including MAF, LYVE1, MERTK, SELENOP, CD48 and MRC1 in the shoulder capsule myeloid 
clusters (blue, as per Figure 1G) and the corresponding STM subsets (red, as predicted by label transfer). 
(E) Box plots (right) show cassette scores for marker genes of the MERTK+LYVE1high cluster in the shoulder 
capsule myeloid clusters (Figure 1G) and corresponding knee STM subsets (as predicted by label transfer). 
Bars  show  median  value,  *P<0.05  (Wald  test).  (F)  Dot  plot  shows  average  expression  of  top  25 
MERTK+LYVE1high  macrophage  cluster  marker  genes  in  the  shoulder  capsule  MERTK+LYVE1high 
macrophages relative to their corresponding cells in the Alivernini et al. (2020) STMs (as predicted by label 
transfer).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  38 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 6. 
 
  39 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Figure 6. The developing shoulder capsule informs a template for resolution.  
scRNAseq was performed on 12, 15 and 17 pcw developing human shoulder joint tissues. (A) UMAP shows 
the major cell types comprising the developing foetal shoulder joint. (B) UMAP (cluster resolution=0.6) shows 
identified myeloid populations in the developing shoulder joint (12, 15 and 17 pcw). Sub-clustering of myeloid 
populations revealed 7 distinct clusters including MERTK+LYVE1+ and MERTK+TIMD4+ populations. (C) 
The plot shows the same foetal cell UMAP with labels transferred from the adult shoulder capsule myeloid 
cells (Figure 1G) (scArches analysis). (D) UMAP (res=0.7) showing CD45–COL1A1+ stromal cell clusters in 
the developing shoulder joint (12, 15 and 17 pcw). (E) The plot shows the same UMAP of developing shoulder 
stromal cells with labels transferred from the adult clusters (Figure 1J) (scArches analysis). (F) The Sankey 
plot shows the mapping between the clusters identified in the developing shoulder stromal cells (D) (left) and 
the transferred labels from the adult fibroblast populations (right). (G-J) Representative Cell DIVE and 
respective H&E stained images of histological sections of foetal shoulder joint at 17 post conception weeks 
(pcw) development stage. (G & H) Sections stained for a panel of markers to identify fibroblasts in the 
shoulder capsule during development (FMOD, DKK3, POSTN, CLU). DAPI nuclear counterstain is dark blue, 
scale bar=20m. (I) High magnification image showing the cell types identified in foetal shoulder capsule 
including macrophages (CD68, CD163, MerTK) and fibroblasts (PDPN, CLU, AXL, GAS6) in the capsule 
lining region at 17 pcw. Scale bar=20 m. (J) High magnification image of the foetal shoulder capsule (17 
pcw) showing immunostaining for macrophage markers MerTK, LYVE1, CD206 and CD163 in the capsule 
lining region. DAPI nuclear counterstain is dark blue, white arrows mark MerTK+ macrophages. Scale bar=20 
m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  40 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
References  
 
1.  T. A. Wynn, Fibrotic disease and the T(H)1/T(H)2 paradigm. Nat Rev Immunol 4, 583-594 (2004). 
2.  P. Ramachandran, R. Dobie, J. R. Wilson-Kanamori, E. F. Dora, B. E. P. Henderson, N. T. Luu, J. 
R. Portman, K. P. Matchett, M. Brice, J. A. Marwick, R. S. Taylor, M. Efremova, R. Vento-Tormo, N. 
O. Carragher, T. J. Kendall, J. A. Fallowfield, E. M. Harrison, D. J. Mole, S. J. Wigmore, P. N. 
Newsome, C. J. Weston, J. P. Iredale, F. Tacke, J. W. Pollard, C. P. Ponting, J. C. Marioni, S. A. 
Teichmann, N. C. Henderson, Resolving the fibrotic niche of human liver cirrhosis at single-cell 
level. Nature 575, 512-518 (2019). 
3.  P. A. Reyfman, J. M. Walter, N. Joshi, K. R. Anekalla, A. C. McQuattie-Pimentel, S. Chiu, R. 
Fernandez, M. Akbarpour, C. I. Chen, Z. Ren, R. Verma, H. Abdala-Valencia, K. Nam, M. Chi, S. 
Han, F. J. Gonzalez-Gonzalez, S. Soberanes, S. Watanabe, K. J. N. Williams, A. S. Flozak, T. T. 
Nicholson, V. K. Morgan, D. R. Winter, M. Hinchcliff, C. L. Hrusch, R. D. Guzy, C. A. Bonham, A. I. 
Sperling, R. Bag, R. B. Hamanaka, G. M. Mutlu, A. V. Yeldandi, S. A. Marshall, A. Shilatifard, L. A. 
N. Amaral, H. Perlman, J. I. Sznajder, A. C. Argento, C. T. Gillespie, J. Dematte, M. Jain, B. D. 
Singer, K. M. Ridge, A. P. Lam, A. Bharat, S. M. Bhorade, C. J. Gottardi, G. R. S. Budinger, A. V. 
Misharin, Single-Cell Transcriptomic Analysis of Human Lung Provides Insights into the 
Pathobiology of Pulmonary Fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 199, 1517-1536 (2019). 
4.  E. Valenzi, M. Bulik, T. Tabib, C. Morse, J. Sembrat, H. Trejo Bittar, M. Rojas, R. Lafyatis, Single-
cell analysis reveals fibroblast heterogeneity and myofibroblasts in systemic sclerosis-associated 
interstitial lung disease. Ann Rheum Dis 78, 1379-1387 (2019). 
5.  T. Tsukui, K. H. Sun, J. B. Wetter, J. R. Wilson-Kanamori, L. A. Hazelwood, N. C. Henderson, T. S. 
Adams, J. C. Schupp, S. D. Poli, I. O. Rosas, N. Kaminski, M. A. Matthay, P. J. Wolters, D. 
Sheppard, Collagen-producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct localization and 
relevance to fibrosis. Nature communications 11, 1920 (2020). 
6.  T. A. Wynn, K. M. Vannella, Macrophages in Tissue Repair, Regeneration, and Fibrosis. Immunity 
44, 450-462 (2016). 
7.  T. A. Wynn, Cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis. J Pathol 214, 199-210 (2008). 
8.  C. Hand, K. Clipsham, J. L. Rees, A. J. Carr, Long-term outcome of frozen shoulder. J Shoulder 
Elbow Surg 17, 231-236 (2008). 
  41 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
9.  K. Walker-Bone, C. Cooper, Hard work never hurt anyone: or did it? A review of occupational 
associations with soft tissue musculoskeletal disorders of the neck and upper limb. Ann Rheum Dis 
64, 1391-1396 (2005). 
10.  A. Rangan, S. D. Brealey, A. Keding, B. Corbacho, M. Northgraves, L. Kottam, L. Goodchild, C. 
Srikesavan, S. Rex, C. P. Charalambous, N. Hanchard, A. Armstrong, A. Brooksbank, A. Carr, C. 
Cooper, J. J. Dias, I. Donnelly, C. Hewitt, S. E. Lamb, C. McDaid, G. Richardson, S. Rodgers, E. 
Sharp, S. Spencer, D. Torgerson, F. Toye, U. F. S. Group, Management of adults with primary 
frozen shoulder in secondary care (UK FROST): a multicentre, pragmatic, three-arm, superiority 
randomised clinical trial. Lancet 396, 977-989 (2020). 
11.  W. V. King, C. Hebron, Frozen shoulder: living with uncertainty and being in "no-man's land". 
Physiother Theory Pract, 1-15 (2022). 
12.  H. D. Green, A. Jones, J. P. Evans, A. R. Wood, R. N. Beaumont, J. Tyrrell, T. M. Frayling, C. 
Smith, M. N. Weedon, A genome-wide association study identifies 5 loci associated with frozen 
shoulder and implicates diabetes as a causal risk factor. PLoS Genet 17, e1009577 (2021). 
13.  S. P. Smith, V. S. Devaraj, T. D. Bunker, The association between frozen shoulder and Dupuytren's 
disease. J Shoulder Elbow Surg 10, 149-151 (2001). 
14.  S. G. Dakin, A. Rangan, F. Martinez, S. Brealey, M. Northgraves, L. Kottam, C. Cooper, C. D. 
Buckley, A. J. Carr, Tissue inflammation signatures point towards resolution in adhesive capsulitis. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 58, 1109-1111 (2019). 
15.  I. Korsunsky, N. Millard, J. Fan, K. Slowikowski, F. Zhang, K. Wei, Y. Baglaenko, M. Brenner, P. R. 
Loh, S. Raychaudhuri, Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat 
Methods 16, 1289-1296 (2019). 
16.  A. P. Croft, J. Campos, K. Jansen, J. D. Turner, J. Marshall, M. Attar, L. Savary, C. Wehmeyer, A. J. 
Naylor, S. Kemble, J. Begum, K. Durholz, H. Perlman, F. Barone, H. M. McGettrick, D. T. Fearon, K. 
Wei, S. Raychaudhuri, I. Korsunsky, M. B. Brenner, M. Coles, S. N. Sansom, A. Filer, C. D. Buckley, 
Distinct fibroblast subsets drive inflammation and damage in arthritis. Nature 570, 246-251 (2019). 
17.  M. Frank-Bertoncelj, M. Trenkmann, K. Klein, E. Karouzakis, H. Rehrauer, A. Bratus, C. Kolling, M. 
Armaka, A. Filer, B. A. Michel, R. E. Gay, C. D. Buckley, G. Kollias, S. Gay, C. Ospelt, 
Epigenetically-driven anatomical diversity of synovial fibroblasts guides joint-specific fibroblast 
functions. Nature communications 8, 14852 (2017). 
  42 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
18.  K. Wei, I. Korsunsky, J. L. Marshall, A. Gao, G. F. M. Watts, T. Major, A. P. Croft, J. Watts, P. E. 
Blazar, J. K. Lange, T. S. Thornhill, A. Filer, K. Raza, L. T. Donlin, A. Accelerating Medicines 
Partnership Rheumatoid, C. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, C. W. Siebel, C. D. Buckley, S. 
Raychaudhuri, M. B. Brenner, Notch signalling drives synovial fibroblast identity and arthritis 
pathology. Nature 582, 259-264 (2020). 
19.  K. Wei, H. N. Nguyen, M. B. Brenner, Fibroblast pathology in inflammatory diseases. J Clin Invest 
131,  (2021). 
20.  G. Lemke, Biology of the TAM receptors. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5, a009076 (2013). 
21.  G. Lemke, T. Burstyn-Cohen, TAM receptors and the clearance of apoptotic cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
1209, 23-29 (2010). 
22.  B. Cai, C. Kasikara, A. C. Doran, R. Ramakrishnan, R. B. Birge, I. Tabas, MerTK signaling in 
macrophages promotes the synthesis of inflammation resolution mediators by suppressing CaMKII 
activity. Sci Signal 11,  (2018). 
23.  R. Hou, E. Denisenko, H. T. Ong, J. A. Ramilowski, A. R. R. Forrest, Predicting cell-to-cell 
communication networks using NATMI. Nature communications 11, 5011 (2020). 
24.  S. Alivernini, L. MacDonald, A. Elmesmari, S. Finlay, B. Tolusso, M. R. Gigante, L. Petricca, C. Di 
Mario, L. Bui, S. Perniola, M. Attar, M. Gessi, A. L. Fedele, S. Chilaka, D. Somma, S. N. Sansom, A. 
Filer, C. McSharry, N. L. Millar, K. Kirschner, A. Nerviani, M. J. Lewis, C. Pitzalis, A. R. Clark, G. 
Ferraccioli, I. Udalova, C. D. Buckley, E. Gremese, I. B. McInnes, T. D. Otto, M. Kurowska-
Stolarska, Distinct synovial tissue macrophage subsets regulate inflammation and remission in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Med 26, 1295-1306 (2020). 
25.  S. Orchard, M. Ammari, B. Aranda, L. Breuza, L. Briganti, F. Broackes-Carter, N. H. Campbell, G. 
Chavali, C. Chen, N. del-Toro, M. Duesbury, M. Dumousseau, E. Galeota, U. Hinz, M. Iannuccelli, 
S. Jagannathan, R. Jimenez, J. Khadake, A. Lagreid, L. Licata, R. C. Lovering, B. Meldal, A. N. 
Melidoni, M. Milagros, D. Peluso, L. Perfetto, P. Porras, A. Raghunath, S. Ricard-Blum, B. Roechert, 
A. Stutz, M. Tognolli, K. van Roey, G. Cesareni, H. Hermjakob, The MIntAct project--IntAct as a 
common curation platform for 11 molecular interaction databases. Nucleic Acids Res 42, D358-363 
(2014). 
  43 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
26.  M. Lotfollahi, M. Naghipourfar, M. D. Luecken, M. Khajavi, M. Buttner, M. Wagenstetter, Z. Avsec, 
A. Gayoso, N. Yosef, M. Interlandi, S. Rybakov, A. V. Misharin, F. J. Theis, Mapping single-cell data 
to reference atlases by transfer learning. Nat Biotechnol 40, 121-130 (2022). 
27.  M. Selman, A. Pardo, N. Kaminski, Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: aberrant recapitulation of 
developmental programs? PLoS Med 5, e62 (2008). 
28.  T. Leng, H. D. Akther, C. P. Hackstein, K. Powell, T. King, M. Friedrich, Z. Christoforidou, S. 
McCuaig, M. Neyazi, C. V. Arancibia-Carcamo, J. Hagel, F. Powrie, I. B. D. I. Oxford, R. S. Peres, 
V. Millar, D. Ebner, R. Lamichhane, J. Ussher, T. S. C. Hinks, E. Marchi, C. Willberg, P. Klenerman, 
TCR and Inflammatory Signals Tune Human MAIT Cells to Exert Specific Tissue Repair and 
Effector Functions. Cell Rep 28, 3077-3091 e3075 (2019). 
29.  T. S. C. Hinks, E. Marchi, M. Jabeen, M. Olshansky, A. Kurioka, T. J. Pediongco, B. S. Meehan, L. 
Kostenko, S. J. Turner, A. J. Corbett, Z. Chen, P. Klenerman, J. McCluskey, Activation and In Vivo 
Evolution of the MAIT Cell Transcriptome in Mice and Humans Reveals Tissue Repair Functionality. 
Cell Rep 28, 3249-3262 e3245 (2019). 
30.  J. L. Linehan, O. J. Harrison, S. J. Han, A. L. Byrd, I. Vujkovic-Cvijin, A. V. Villarino, S. K. Sen, J. 
Shaik, M. Smelkinson, S. Tamoutounour, N. Collins, N. Bouladoux, A. Dzutsev, S. P. Rosshart, J. H. 
Arbuckle, C. R. Wang, T. M. Kristie, B. Rehermann, G. Trinchieri, J. M. Brenchley, J. J. O'Shea, Y. 
Belkaid, Non-classical Immunity Controls Microbiota Impact on Skin Immunity and Tissue Repair. 
Cell 172, 784-796 e718 (2018). 
31.  F. Zhang, K. Wei, K. Slowikowski, C. Y. Fonseka, D. A. Rao, S. Kelly, S. M. Goodman, D. 
Tabechian, L. B. Hughes, K. Salomon-Escoto, G. F. M. Watts, A. H. Jonsson, J. Rangel-Moreno, N. 
Meednu, C. Rozo, W. Apruzzese, T. M. Eisenhaure, D. J. Lieb, D. L. Boyle, A. M. Mandelin, 2nd, A. 
Accelerating Medicines Partnership Rheumatoid, C. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, B. F. Boyce, 
E. DiCarlo, E. M. Gravallese, P. K. Gregersen, L. Moreland, G. S. Firestein, N. Hacohen, C. 
Nusbaum, J. A. Lederer, H. Perlman, C. Pitzalis, A. Filer, V. M. Holers, V. P. Bykerk, L. T. Donlin, J. 
H. Anolik, M. B. Brenner, S. Raychaudhuri, Defining inflammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis 
joint synovial tissues by integrating single-cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry. Nat Immunol 20, 
928-942 (2019). 
32.  L. MacDonald, S. Alivernini, B. Tolusso, A. Elmesmari, D. Somma, S. Perniola, A. Paglionico, L. 
Petricca, S. L. Bosello, A. Carfi, M. Sali, E. Stigliano, A. Cingolani, R. Murri, V. Arena, M. Fantoni, 
  44 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
M. Antonelli, F. Landi, F. Franceschi, M. Sanguinetti, I. B. McInnes, C. McSharry, A. Gasbarrini, T. 
D. Otto, M. Kurowska-Stolarska, E. Gremese, COVID-19 and RA share an SPP1 myeloid pathway 
that drives PD-L1+ neutrophils and CD14+ monocytes. JCI Insight 6,  (2021). 
33.  P. Ramachandran, A. Pellicoro, M. A. Vernon, L. Boulter, R. L. Aucott, A. Ali, S. N. Hartland, V. K. 
Snowdon, A. Cappon, T. T. Gordon-Walker, M. J. Williams, D. R. Dunbar, J. R. Manning, N. van 
Rooijen, J. A. Fallowfield, S. J. Forbes, J. P. Iredale, Differential Ly-6C expression identifies the 
recruited macrophage phenotype, which orchestrates the regression of murine liver fibrosis. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, E3186-3195 (2012). 
34.  J. S. Duffield, S. J. Forbes, C. M. Constandinou, S. Clay, M. Partolina, S. Vuthoori, S. Wu, R. Lang, 
J. P. Iredale, Selective depletion of macrophages reveals distinct, opposing roles during liver injury 
and repair. J Clin Invest 115, 56-65 (2005). 
35.  K. R. Karlmark, R. Weiskirchen, H. W. Zimmermann, N. Gassler, F. Ginhoux, C. Weber, M. Merad, 
T. Luedde, C. Trautwein, F. Tacke, Hepatic recruitment of the inflammatory Gr1+ monocyte subset 
upon liver injury promotes hepatic fibrosis. Hepatology 50, 261-274 (2009). 
36.  G. Biffi, T. E. Oni, B. Spielman, Y. Hao, E. Elyada, Y. Park, J. Preall, D. A. Tuveson, IL1-Induced 
JAK/STAT Signaling Is Antagonized by TGFbeta to Shape CAF Heterogeneity in Pancreatic Ductal 
Adenocarcinoma. Cancer Discov 9, 282-301 (2019). 
37.  F. Rivellese, A. E. A. Surace, K. Goldmann, E. Sciacca, C. Cubuk, G. Giorli, C. R. John, A. Nerviani, 
L. Fossati-Jimack, G. Thorborn, M. Ahmed, E. Prediletto, S. E. Church, B. M. Hudson, S. E. Warren, 
P. M. McKeigue, F. Humby, M. Bombardieri, M. R. Barnes, M. J. Lewis, C. Pitzalis, R. R. c. group, 
Rituximab versus tocilizumab in rheumatoid arthritis: synovial biopsy-based biomarker analysis of 
the phase 4 R4RA randomized trial. Nat Med 28, 1256-1268 (2022). 
38.  L. J. Marsh, S. Kemble, P. Reis Nisa, R. Singh, A. P. Croft, Fibroblast pathology in inflammatory 
joint disease. Immunol Rev 302, 163-183 (2021). 
39.  S. Liu, S. W. Xu, K. Blumbach, M. Eastwood, C. P. Denton, B. Eckes, T. Krieg, D. J. Abraham, A. 
Leask, Expression of integrin beta1 by fibroblasts is required for tissue repair in vivo. J Cell Sci 123, 
3674-3682 (2010). 
40.  K. O. Lai, F. C. Ip, J. Cheung, A. K. Fu, N. Y. Ip, Expression of Eph receptors in skeletal muscle and 
their localization at the neuromuscular junction. Mol Cell Neurosci 17, 1034-1047 (2001). 
  45 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
41.  F. Irie, Y. Yamaguchi, EphB receptors regulate dendritic spine development via intersectin, Cdc42 
and N-WASP. Nat Neurosci 5, 1117-1118 (2002). 
42.  B. Jang, A. Kim, J. Hwang, H. K. Song, Y. Kim, E. S. Oh, Emerging Role of Syndecans in 
Extracellular Matrix Remodeling in Cancer. J Histochem Cytochem 68, 863-870 (2020). 
43.  P. Xing, Z. Liao, Z. Ren, J. Zhao, F. Song, G. Wang, K. Chen, J. Yang, Roles of low-density 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 in tumors. Chin J Cancer 35, 6 (2016). 
44.  H. Y. Lim, S. Y. Lim, C. K. Tan, C. H. Thiam, C. C. Goh, D. Carbajo, S. H. S. Chew, P. See, S. 
Chakarov, X. N. Wang, L. H. Lim, L. A. Johnson, J. Lum, C. Y. Fong, A. Bongso, A. Biswas, C. Goh, 
M. Evrard, K. P. Yeo, R. Basu, J. K. Wang, Y. Tan, R. Jain, S. Tikoo, C. Choong, W. Weninger, M. 
Poidinger, R. E. Stanley, M. Collin, N. S. Tan, L. G. Ng, D. G. Jackson, F. Ginhoux, V. Angeli, 
Hyaluronan Receptor LYVE-1-Expressing Macrophages Maintain Arterial Tone through Hyaluronan-
Mediated Regulation of Smooth Muscle Cell Collagen. Immunity 49, 326-341 e327 (2018). 
45.  S. Chakarov, H. Y. Lim, L. Tan, S. Y. Lim, P. See, J. Lum, X. M. Zhang, S. Foo, S. Nakamizo, K. 
Duan, W. T. Kong, R. Gentek, A. Balachander, D. Carbajo, C. Bleriot, B. Malleret, J. K. C. Tam, S. 
Baig, M. Shabeer, S. E. S. Toh, A. Schlitzer, A. Larbi, T. Marichal, B. Malissen, J. Chen, M. 
Poidinger, K. Kabashima, M. Bajenoff, L. G. Ng, V. Angeli, F. Ginhoux, Two distinct interstitial 
macrophage populations coexist across tissues in specific subtissular niches. Science 363,  (2019). 
46.  C. Schulz, E. Gomez Perdiguero, L. Chorro, H. Szabo-Rogers, N. Cagnard, K. Kierdorf, M. Prinz, B. 
Wu, S. E. Jacobsen, J. W. Pollard, J. Frampton, K. J. Liu, F. Geissmann, A lineage of myeloid cells 
independent of Myb and hematopoietic stem cells. Science 336, 86-90 (2012). 
47.  S. Yona, K. W. Kim, Y. Wolf, A. Mildner, D. Varol, M. Breker, D. Strauss-Ayali, S. Viukov, M. 
Guilliams, A. Misharin, D. A. Hume, H. Perlman, B. Malissen, E. Zelzer, S. Jung, Fate mapping 
reveals origins and dynamics of monocytes and tissue macrophages under homeostasis. Immunity 
38, 79-91 (2013). 
48.  S. A. Dick, J. A. Macklin, S. Nejat, A. Momen, X. Clemente-Casares, M. G. Althagafi, J. Chen, C. 
Kantores, S. Hosseinzadeh, L. Aronoff, A. Wong, R. Zaman, I. Barbu, R. Besla, K. J. Lavine, B. 
Razani, F. Ginhoux, M. Husain, M. I. Cybulsky, C. S. Robbins, S. Epelman, Self-renewing resident 
cardiac macrophages limit adverse remodeling following myocardial infarction. Nat Immunol 20, 29-
39 (2019). 
  46 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
49.  S. G. Dakin, F. O. Martinez, C. Yapp, G. Wells, U. Oppermann, B. J. Dean, R. D. Smith, K. 
Wheway, B. Watkins, L. Roche, A. J. Carr, Inflammation activation and resolution in human tendon 
disease. Science translational medicine 7, 311ra173 (2015). 
50.  A. J. Carr, R. Murphy, S. G. Dakin, I. Rombach, K. Wheway, B. Watkins, S. L. Franklin, Platelet-
Rich Plasma Injection With Arthroscopic Acromioplasty for Chronic Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. Am J Sports Med 43, 2891-2897 (2015). 
51.  J. P. Hagel, K. Bennett, F. Buffa, P. Klenerman, C. B. Willberg, K. Powell, Defining T Cell Subsets in 
Human Tonsils Using ChipCytometry. J Immunol,  (2021). 
52.  J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. 
Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J. Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, 
A. Cardona, Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat Methods 9, 676-682 
(2012). 
53.  A. Corwin, E. McDonough, C. Surrette, P. Dumpuri, A. Sood, F. M. Ginty. (AACR, 2020). 
54.  A. U. Lindner, M. Salvucci, E. McDonough, S. Cho, X. Stachtea, E. P. O'Connell, A. D. Corwin, A. 
Santamaria-Pang, S. Carberry, M. Fichtner, S. Van Schaeybroeck, P. Laurent-Puig, J. P. Burke, D. 
A. McNamara, M. Lawler, A. Sood, J. F. Graf, M. Rehm, P. D. Dunne, D. B. Longley, F. Ginty, J. H. 
M. Prehn, An atlas of inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity of apoptosis competency in colorectal 
cancer tissue at single-cell resolution. Cell Death Differ 29, 806-817 (2022). 
55.  P. Bankhead, M. B. Loughrey, J. A. Fernández, Y. Dombrowski, D. G. McArt, P. D. Dunne, S. 
McQuaid, R. T. Gray, L. J. Murray, H. G. Coleman, QuPath: Open source software for digital 
pathology image analysis. Scientific reports 7, 1-7 (2017). 
56.  S. L. Wolock, R. Lopez, A. M. Klein, Scrublet: Computational Identification of Cell Doublets in 
Single-Cell Transcriptomic Data. Cell Syst 8, 281-291 e289 (2019). 
57.  T. Stuart, A. Butler, P. Hoffman, C. Hafemeister, E. Papalexi, W. M. Mauck, 3rd, Y. Hao, M. 
Stoeckius, P. Smibert, R. Satija, Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-
1902 e1821 (2019). 
58.  I. Tirosh, B. Izar, S. M. Prakadan, M. H. Wadsworth, 2nd, D. Treacy, J. J. Trombetta, A. Rotem, C. 
Rodman, C. Lian, G. Murphy, M. Fallahi-Sichani, K. Dutton-Regester, J. R. Lin, O. Cohen, P. Shah, 
D. Lu, A. S. Genshaft, T. K. Hughes, C. G. Ziegler, S. W. Kazer, A. Gaillard, K. E. Kolb, A. C. Villani, 
C. M. Johannessen, A. Y. Andreev, E. M. Van Allen, M. Bertagnolli, P. K. Sorger, R. J. Sullivan, K. 
  47 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
T. Flaherty, D. T. Frederick, J. Jane-Valbuena, C. H. Yoon, O. Rozenblatt-Rosen, A. K. Shalek, A. 
Regev, L. A. Garraway, Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-
cell RNA-seq. Science 352, 189-196 (2016). 
59.  D. Aran, A. P. Looney, L. Liu, E. Wu, V. Fong, A. Hsu, S. Chak, R. P. Naikawadi, P. J. Wolters, A. 
R. Abate, A. J. Butte, M. Bhattacharya, Reference-based analysis of lung single-cell sequencing 
reveals a transitional profibrotic macrophage. Nat Immunol 20, 163-172 (2019). 
60.  M. I. Love, W. Huber, S. Anders, Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15, 550 (2014). 
61.  M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. 
S. Dwight, J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. Issel-Tarver, A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, 
J. E. Richardson, M. Ringwald, G. M. Rubin, G. Sherlock, Gene ontology: tool for the unification of 
biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet 25, 25-29 (2000). 
62.  C. Gene Ontology, The Gene Ontology resource: enriching a GOld mine. Nucleic Acids Res 49, 
D325-D334 (2021). 
63.  T. Wu, E. Hu, S. Xu, M. Chen, P. Guo, Z. Dai, T. Feng, L. Zhou, W. Tang, L. Zhan, X. Fu, S. Liu, X. 
Bo, G. Yu, clusterProfiler 4.0: A universal enrichment tool for interpreting omics data. Innovation 
(Camb) 2, 100141 (2021). 
64.  S. Aibar, C. B. Gonzalez-Blas, T. Moerman, V. A. Huynh-Thu, H. Imrichova, G. Hulselmans, F. 
Rambow, J. C. Marine, P. Geurts, J. Aerts, J. van den Oord, Z. K. Atak, J. Wouters, S. Aerts, 
SCENIC: single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nat Methods 14, 1083-1086 
(2017). 
65.  R. Janky, A. Verfaillie, H. Imrichova, B. Van de Sande, L. Standaert, V. Christiaens, G. Hulselmans, 
K. Herten, M. Naval Sanchez, D. Potier, D. Svetlichnyy, Z. Kalender Atak, M. Fiers, J. C. Marine, S. 
Aerts, iRegulon: from a gene list to a gene regulatory network using large motif and track 
collections. PLoS Comput Biol 10, e1003731 (2014). 
66.  P. Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozier, N. S. Baliga, J. T. Wang, D. Ramage, N. Amin, B. Schwikowski, 
T. Ideker, Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction 
networks. Genome Res 13, 2498-2504 (2003). 
67.  R. Patro, G. Duggal, M. I. Love, R. A. Irizarry, C. Kingsford, Salmon provides fast and bias-aware 
quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14, 417-419 (2017). 
  48 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
68.  M. E. Ritchie, B. Phipson, D. Wu, Y. Hu, C. W. Law, W. Shi, G. K. Smyth, limma powers differential 
expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43, e47 
(2015). 
69.  X. Wang, J. Park, K. Susztak, N. R. Zhang, M. Li, Bulk tissue cell type deconvolution with multi-
subject single-cell expression reference. Nature communications 10, 380 (2019). 
70.  B. Jew, M. Alvarez, E. Rahmani, Z. Miao, A. Ko, K. M. Garske, J. H. Sul, K. H. Pietilainen, P. 
Pajukanta, E. Halperin, Accurate estimation of cell composition in bulk expression through robust 
integration of single-cell information. Nature communications 11, 1971 (2020). 
71.  W. Huber, V. J. Carey, R. Gentleman, S. Anders, M. Carlson, B. S. Carvalho, H. C. Bravo, S. Davis, 
L. Gatto, T. Girke, R. Gottardo, F. Hahne, K. D. Hansen, R. A. Irizarry, M. Lawrence, M. I. Love, J. 
MacDonald, V. Obenchain, A. K. Oles, H. Pages, A. Reyes, P. Shannon, G. K. Smyth, D. 
Tenenbaum, L. Waldron, M. Morgan, Orchestrating high-throughput genomic analysis with 
Bioconductor. Nat Methods 12, 115-121 (2015). 
72.  M. Buttner, J. Ostner, C. L. Muller, F. J. Theis, B. Schubert, scCODA is a Bayesian model for 
compositional single-cell data analysis. Nature communications 12, 6876 (2021). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  49 

NEW PAGE

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.01.16.522218; this version posted January 16, 2023. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
Acknowledgements: 
The human foetal material was provided by the Joint MRC/Wellcome Trust (grant# MR/R006237/1) Human 
Developmental Biology Resource (http://hdbr.org). We thank the Oxford Genomics Centre at the Wellcome 
Centre for Human Genetics (funded by Wellcome Trust grant reference 203141/Z/16/Z) for the generation 
and initial processing of sequencing data. Cell DIVE equipment in the Digital Pathology Omics Core was 
generously funded by the Kennedy Trust for Rheumatology Research. Research at the Nuffield Department 
of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford is supported through the 
National Institute for Health Research Oxford Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Centre. The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Health Service and the national 
Institute for Health Research of the Department of Health.  
 
Funding sources to acknowledge: 
Versus Arthritis Career Development Fellowship (22425) 
Medical Research Council MR/S035850/1 
Human Immune Discovery Initiative (0006565 and 0008181) & the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, 
Oxford 
Dunhill Medical Trust RTF1906\121 
Rosetrees Trust (PGL21/10048) 
Wellcome Trust (222426/Z/21/Z) 
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES) 
 
 
 
  50 

NEW PAGE