Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine, 2022, 11, 63-76 
https://www.scirp.org/journal/ojrm 
ISSN Online: 2169-2521 
ISSN Print: 2169-2513 
 
 
 
Scar Acceleration Method—MAC® in the 
Treatment of Chronic Wounds in   
Lymphedema: Case Report 
Marcus Vinicius de Mello Pinto1*, Aline Ronis Sampaio1, Miriam Viviane Baron2,   
Angela Gonçalves Marx3, Esteban Fortuny4, Francisco Javier Millan Martínez5,   
Alessandra Fernandes de Lima6, Thais do Prado Pessanha Passos7,   
Alexandre Gomes Sancho8,9 
1Celulare Institute, Petrópolis, Brazil 
2Program in Medicine and Health Sciences of the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul (PUC/RS),  
Porto Alegre, Brazil 
3Faculty of Medicine of USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
4Universidad Finis Terrae, Santiago, Chile 
5Hospital Viamed Virgen de la Paloma, Madrid, Spain 
6Clinilar, Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
7Oncology Physiotherapy by ABFO, COFFITO, Brazil 
8Physiotherapy Course, Grande Rio University, Duque de Caxias, Brazil 
9Augusto Motta University Center (UNISUAM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
 
 
 
How to cite this paper: de Mello Pinto,  Abstract 
M.V., Sampaio, A.R., Baron, M.V., Marx, 
A.G., Fortuny, E., Martínez, F.J.M., de Lima,  Wounds are a serious public health problem in our country. Access to effective, 
A.F., do Prado Pessanha Passos, T. and San- low-cost treatment is still far from the reality for many patients leading to a 
cho,  A.G.  (2022)  Scar  Acceleration  Me- chronic and serious condition. They interfere in the quality of life of these indi-
thod—MAC® in the Treatment of Chronic 
viduals who isolate themselves socially constrained by the appearance of their 
Wounds in Lymphedema: Case Report. Open 
wounds. The report shows the case of a patient with type II diabetes mellitus, 
Journal of Regenerative Medicine, 11, 63-76. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005   with chronic wounds in lymphedema in the lower limbs who was treated with 
  the Scar Acceleration Methodology associated with Complex Decongestive The- 
Received: August 10, 2022  rapy, leading to an improvement in her social participation and quality of life. 
Accepted: December 27, 2022 
 
Published: December 30, 2022 
Keywords 
 
Copyright © 2022 by author(s) and   Lympedema, Wound Healing, Diabetes Mellitus Complication 
Scientific Research Publishing Inc. 
This work is licensed under the Creative 
 
Commons Attribution International  
License (CC BY 4.0). 
1. Introduction 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/   
Open Access
    Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an important and growing health problem for all 
 
*Creator of the cicatricial acceleration method. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  Dec. 30, 2022  63  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
countries, regardless of their level of development [1]. Patients with obesity-ass- 
ociated DM have an increased risk factor for developing complications such as 
diabetic kidney disease (DKD) or diabetic nephropathy (DN), complicated skin 
and tissue infections (cSSTIs) and erysipelas [2] [3] [4]. 
Skin breakdown in patients with advanced diabetes mellitus provides a portal 
of entry for bacteria, the most common cSSTI pathogen being S. aureus [2] [3] 
[4] [5]. Erysipelas is a cutaneous infectious process, which can reach the fat of 
the subcutaneous cellular tissue, caused by a bacterium that spreads through the 
lymphatic vessels and when untreated in its acute phase, at the beginning of the 
disease, or when it is recurrent with repeated outbreaks, it can lead to some com-
plications, including superficial or deep ulcerations (wounds), and the most com-
mon sequela is lymphedema, which is persistent and hard swelling in the leg and 
ankle [6] [7].  
Chronic kidney disease affects more than 500 million people worldwide. In 
this context, the uremic toxins present are related to the worsening of tissue heal-
ing [4]. DN associated with pathophysiologically and immunologically compro-
mised lymphatics in post-erysipelas lymphedema can delay and alter the wound 
healing process, leading to a chronic process, with risks of reinfection and with a 
significant loss of functionality and quality of life for the patient [4] [8].  
The objective of this case report with literature review is to disclose the result 
of the conservative treatment of chronic wounds in lymphedema after an epi-
sode of erysipelas in a patient with DRD with the Scar Acceleration Method 
(MAC®) associated with Complex Decongestive Therapy (CFT). 
2. Clinical Case Description 
Patient MHRG, female, 63 years old, with type II diabetes mellitus, hypertensive 
and obese. She sought the physiotherapy service for tissue repair of leg wounds 
and functional change with a medical diagnosis of bullous erysipelas. As the 
main complaint, very strong pain in the lower limbs and wounds, from which 
exudate was leaking in large amounts, hindering activities of daily living and so-
cial participation. 
In 2019, he already had symptoms of pain in the lower limbs and edema that 
gave in to rest. In the same year, he had a fall from a low height that caused a 
diaphyseal fracture in the left femur diagnosed late, which caused a vicious bone 
consolidation, where the bone healed in an incorrect anatomical position, caus-
ing changes in gait and functional losses, leading to walking with the aid of a 
walker. 
After a walk on the beach, he noticed a redness in his legs that extended and 
limited to the region below the patella. Concurrent with this sign, she had a 
fever and chills. She went to an emergency medical service where she was di-
agnosed with erysipelas and immediately medicated. The wounds appeared af-
ter an injury to the anterior region of the left leg. After this tissue injury, bull-
ous vesicles began to appear with liquid content inside which, when they rup-
tured, contaminate the adjacent tissues, developing new bubbles. She noticed a 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  64  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
worsening of the condition when symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, inappe-
tence, weight and hair loss started to appear and she needed hospitalization for 
intravenous medication administration. His wounds did not heal and his legs 
swelled. 
Upon inspection, he presented bilateral lymphedema in the lower limbs up to 
the infrapatellar region, stage II in the right leg and stage III in the left leg with 
alteration of the integumentary tissue with a fibrosclerotic aspect, “peau d’orange”, 
hyperpigmentation (Ocre dermatitis) and erythema. Multiple wounds and ulce-
rations, intense exudate extravasation and adherent scars from past ulcerations. 
It has a history of previous therapies that had no effect, such as dressings with 
varied coverage and treatment with hyperbaric oxygen therapy. 
After biochemical examination, important metabolic alterations were detected, 
among them: urea, uric acid, creatinine, glucose and antibiogram with wound 
secretion accusing Staphylococcus aureus contamination and resistance to beta 
lactam antibiotics. 
She was referred by the physiotherapist responsible for the treatment, for 
evaluation by an endocrinologist to normalize metabolic rates, to an angiologist 
for evaluation of venous and arterial structures, where neither the physical ex-
amination nor the doppler ultrasound examination found changes in flow and 
morphology. of vases. She was also referred to a nephrologist for evaluation of 
altered uremic rates and treatment of diabetic nephropathy with which she is 
currently following up (Figure 1). 
Treatment using MAC started on 04/19/2021 and ended on 07/05/2021. Short, 
medium and long-term goals were set after the physical therapy assessment. 
Short term: MAC® doping. Single doses/descending—LED, in Amber, Blue and 
Violet wavelengths—300 s/180 s/120 s. Medium term: After exudate extravasa-
tion ceases and skin infection control—Single doses/decreasing—LED, in Red, 
amber, blue and violet wavelengths—300 s/120 s/60 s/30 s. Long-term: After con-
trolling the skin infection, advancing to the proliferative phase in the wound 
healing process, and doppler ultrasound examination showing no arterial in-
volvement, TCD was added to the treatment with the MAC method, mainly Com-
pressive Therapy with Multilayer Bandages. Follow-up: (Figure 2). 
 
A                                  B                               C                                 D
 
Figure 1. Lower limbs on April 19, 2021, before treatment with the Scar Acceleration 
Methodology—MAC® associated with Complex Decongestive Therapy. (A) Posterior leg 
in left lower limb; (B) Medial surface of leg in left lower limb; (C) Anterior surface of leg 
in left lower limb; (D) Lateral aspect of leg in right lower limb. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  65  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
A                                  B                                     C D
 
Figure 2. Lower limbs on July 5, 2021, after completion of treatment with the Scar Acce-
leration  Methodology—MAC®  associated  with  Complex  Decongestive  Therapy.  (A) 
Posterior leg in left lower limb; (B) Medial surface of leg in left lower limb; (C) Anterior 
surface of leg in left lower limb; (D) Lateral aspect of leg in right lower limb. 
3. Discussion and Literature Review 
3.1. Diabetes Mellitus 
The International Diabetes Federation estimated in 2019 that 31.6 million adults 
aged between 20 and 79 years in the South and Central America region, or 9.4% 
of the regional population in this age group, has diabetes. Of these, 13.3 million 
(41.9%) are undiagnosed. Brazil is the country with the highest number of adults 
with diabetes (16.8 million). The prevalence of diabetes is higher in women (17.9 
million; 10.4%) than in men (13.8 million; 8.4%). Complications of diabetes are 
categorized as microvascular and macrovascular disorders. Immune dysfunc-
tion, diabetic neuropathy, poor circulation, and chronic kidney disease in pa-
tients with diabetes mellitus put these patients at high risk for many types of 
typical and atypical infections and impaired wound healing [9].  
3.2. Diabetic Kidney Disease (DKD) ou Diabetic Nephropathy (DN) 
One of the most frequent complications in patients with DM is DN. Currently, it 
is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease and the main cause of cardiovas-
cular morbidity and mortality in these patients [9].  
Chronic low-grade inflammation and activation of the innate immune system 
are key factors in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus. Several inflammatory 
parameters are elevated in diabetic patients and constitute strong predictors of 
the development of this disease. The increase in inflammatory cytokine levels in 
the diabetic patient leads to microvascular complications, such as the develop-
ment of nephropathy [9] [10]. Activated immune cells migrate and infiltrate 
kidney tissue locally, producing more inflammatory mediators and chemokines 
that recruit more immune cells to the kidney. In addition, activated resident 
kidney cells can also produce additional pro-inflammatory mediators, contri-
buting to sustained inflammation and the induction of kidney damage [11].  
Early detection of DKD, characterized by an increase in urinary albumin ex-
cretion and/or a reduction in TFG, should be performed by measuring the al-
bumin concentration in an isolated urine sample, and the diagnosis should be 
confirmed on a second occasion, and TFG estimation by equations based on se-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  66  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
rum creatinine. 
Inflammation, along with oxidative stress and fibrosis plus numerous devia-
tions from normal homeostasis, including hemodynamic abnormalities, which 
trigger increased systemic and intraglomerular pressure, metabolic abnormali-
ties, and activation of the renin-angiotensin system is the link to understanding 
of the pathogenesis and progression of DN [9].  
Uremic toxins, generated in renal dysfunction, are responsible for the pro-
gression of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) by inducing the loss of residual renal 
function, triggering systemic and vascular inflammatory responses and, thus, 
increasing renal endothelial dysfunction. Uremic toxins are responsible for the 
progression of CKD and loss of residual renal function [4]. 
3.3. Diabetic Kidney Disease and Wound Healing 
Healing is developed by a harmonic set of local cellular and biochemical events, 
common to different sectors of the organism, it can be said that these influence 
its basic intermediary mechanisms such as hemostasis, inflammation, cell proli-
feration and wound remodeling [4].  
Renal dysfunction has been associated with poor wound healing outcomes in 
the diabetic population. Adverse effects of CKD include: decreased phagocytic 
activity of polymorphonuclear cells, impaired tissue healing, delayed inflamma-
tory healing process, low proliferation of fibroblasts and endothelial cells, low 
tissue levels of hydroxyproline and collagen, subcutaneous connective tissue and 
granulation tissue [4] [12].  
According to Silva et al., 2018, studies have shown that granulation tissue was 
reduced in uremic mice by performing histological analysis five days after the 
procedure for inducing renal dysfunction, as well as inhibiting cell proliferation 
in fibroblasts and tissue endothelial cells of granulation [4]. 
In studies, Xie et al., 2019, used diabetic mice with kidney injury that showed 
remarkably impaired wound healing processes, concomitant with reductions in 
cell proliferation and angiogenesis, as well as increases in M1 polarized macro-
phages, infiltrating neutrophils, oxidative stress, and cell apoptosis. Further-
more, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) results showed corres-
ponding alterations of related genes (TNF-α, IL-1β, SOD2) in wounds from db/db 
mice with kidney injury. Renal manipulation in this study accelerated the progress 
of renal impairment, which has been shown to worsen impaired skin wound 
healing in diabetic mice leading to a significant increase in urinary protein ex-
cretion [10] [12].  
Patients with advanced DM have an increased risk factor for developing many 
types of infections. Of these, cSSTIs are of concern for two reasons. First, im-
munological defects in patients with diabetes mellitus lead to a reduced response 
to the most common cSSTI pathogen, S. aureus. Second, the breakdown of the 
skin that leads to ulceration provides a route of entry for the bacteria [2] [5] 
[13]. 
All DM-related comorbidities are directly or indirectly related to chronic 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  67  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
hyperglycemia. Maintaining adequate glycemic control can reduce risk and is 
important for the prophylaxis and treatment of infections in patients with DM 
[1].  
Several factors may contribute to the risk of developing infections in diabetic 
patients, such as decreased activity of polymorphonuclear neutrophils, alteration 
in adherence, chemotaxis and leukocyte opsonization, inefficient and delayed 
cellular immune response to harmful agents, alteration of antioxidant systems 
and lower production of interleukins (IL-2), reduced vascular response to in-
flammatory mediators such as histamine and bradykinin, vascular insufficiency, 
peripheral and autonomic neuropathy, decreased protein binding with conse-
quent edema, reduced mast cell degranulation, worsening of tissue oxygenation 
and skin and skin colonization mucosa with pathogens such as Staphylococcus 
aureus and Candida [1].  
Resident bacteria are often considered commensals, meaning the microbes are 
not harmful and can be beneficial to the host. The resident flora consists mainly 
of Gram-positive cocci (Staphylococcus epidermidis), diphtheroids (Corynebac-
terium and Brevibacterium) and anaerobic rods (Propioni-bacterium). Resident 
flora organisms contribute to resistance against colonization by pathogenic bac-
teria by hydrolyzing lipids and producing fatty acids, which are toxic to many 
bacteria. Staphylococcus epidermidis is a cutaneous commensal but can be an 
opportunistic pathogen in immunocompromised hosts. The transient flora is 
mainly represented by Staphylococcus aureus (coagulase-positive) and Strepto-
coccus pyogenes. These bacteria, originating from the environment [14].  
3.4. Erysipela 
According to the Brazilian Society of Angiology and Vascular Surgery, one of the 
most common local complications in diabetics and obese patients is erysipelas. 
Erysipelas is also known as “St. Anthony’s Fire” (due to its intense fire eruption) 
is a skin infection involving the dermis layer of the skin that may extend to the 
superficial cutaneous lymphatics, caused by group A streptococci and Staphylo-
coccus aureus, but other streptococci and Gram-negative bacteria. appear to be 
the causative agents in some cases. The skin infection spreads through a crack in 
the skin, directly invading the lymphatic system and causing erysipelas. There-
fore, it is important to assess the patient for any skin trauma such as portals of 
entry or recent pharyngitis. Erysipelas can be serious. 
Risk factors that predispose people to developing erysipelas are obesity, lym-
phedema, athlete’s foot, leg ulcers, eczema, intravenous drug abuse, poorly con-
trolled diabetes, and liver disease. 
No laboratory tests are necessary for the diagnosis of erysipelas, its findings 
are nonspecific and may involve an elevated leukocyte count with a predomin-
ance of neutrophils and elevated C-reactive protein. Clinical findings are predo-
minant for the diagnosis, which is characterized by an area of well-demarcated, 
elevated erythema and faster development. Patients may complain of burning, 
tenderness, and itching at the site. It most often affects the lower limbs, the face 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  68  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
being the second most affected site. 
Local complications are more common than systemic complications. When 
the patient is treated early in the disease, complications are not as obvious or se-
vere. However, cases not treated in time can progress to abscesses, superficial or 
deep ulcerations (sores), and vein thrombosis. The most common sequel is 
lymphedema, which is persistent, hard swelling located mainly in the leg and 
ankle, resulting from repeated outbreaks of erysipelas [6]. 
3.5. Lympedema 
According to the 6th Latin American Consensus for Treatment of Lymphedema, 
lymphedema comprises the accumulation of water, salts, electrolytes, high mo-
lecular weight proteins and other elements in the interstitial space, leading to an 
increase in the volume of the body region as a result of an alteration dynamics 
and/or mechanics of the lymphatic circulation that leads to a progressive and 
evolutionary increase in the volume of the limb or body region with a decrease 
in functional and immunological capacity, weight gain and morphological changes 
[15]. 
Genetic, iatrogenic, traumatic or infectious abnormalities of the lymphatic sys-
tem are factors for the development of dysfunctions and serious complications 
in the lymphatic vasculature, including lymphedema. Recent research suggests 
that many of these abnormalities are related not only to changes in lymphatic 
fluid transport function, but also loss of lymphatic regulation of normal immune 
responses [16] [17]. 
Lymphedema can be classified as primary, when hereditary defects in lym-
phatic vascular development or function are the cause, and secondary, a result of 
obstruction or disruption of the acquired lymphatic vascular system [16] [17]. 
The International Society of Lymphology rates a lymphedematous limb on a 
three-stage scale with recognition of Stage 0 (Table 1). 
3.6. Wound in Lympedema 
The lymphatic system is a third circulation that is part of our body’s vascular 
network. Lymphatics contribute to extracellular space homeostasis and normal 
wound healing. Lymphatic vessels control interstitial microcirculation, removing 
macromolecules and particles from the extravascular space that are too large to 
re-enter the blood capillaries. If these materials and water are not removed by 
failure of the lymphatics, the balance of osmotic and hydrostatic forces within 
the tissues shifts, builds up—proteins and other macromolecules and fluids around 
the cells result in tissue toxicity, cell damage, delayed healing and pathologies [8] 
[18]. 
Lymphedema is known to delay wound healing, swelling of the interstitium 
leads to disruption of normal nutrient delivery pathways to cells, which impairs 
normal wound healing. In addition to the pathophysiological mechanisms, con-
sisting of impaired tissue remodeling, increased internal tissue pressure (leading  
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  69  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
Table 1. Prepared by the authors based on the article: Executive Committee of the Inter-
national Society of Lymphology. The diagnosis and treatment of peripheral lymphedema: 
2020 Consensus Document of the International Society of Lymphology. Lymphology. 
2020 development of verrucous overgrowths). 
Stages  Characteristics 
Latent or subclinical condition 
 
Swelling is not yet evident 
May be transient and may take months or years before overt swelling 
stage 0 
occurs (Stages I-III) 
Initial fluid accumulation relatively high in protein content (compared 
Stage I  to “venous” edema) 
Decreases with elevation of the limb 
Involves more changes in tissue structures that increase the risk of 
Stage II  fibrosis, infection, and skin lesions. 
Limb elevation alone rarely reduces tissue swelling. 
Lymphostatic “elephantiasis”. 
Locker sign is absent. 
Stage III 
Trophic skin changes (acanthosis, changes in skin character and 
thickness, subsequent fat deposition and fibrosis. 
 
to microcirculatory ischemia) and accumulation of cellular debris, it is suspected 
that the balance of immune cells involved in wound healing is disrupted in 
lymphedema [8]. 
One of the functions of the lymphatic system besides draining interstitial fluid 
and absorbing gastrointestinal lipids is trafficking of immune cells. It regulates 
immune responses by transporting bacteria, foreign antigens, particles, exosomes 
and immune cells to regional lymph nodes and lymphoid structures. The inten-
sive defense provided by acquired immunity requires functioning lymphatic or-
gans [8] [16] [17]. Lymph nodes provide a specialized microenvironment for 
migrating immune cells to meet, especially T lymphocytes and antigen-presenting 
cells, including dendritic cells (DCs) that exist in peripheral tissues and enter 
blood capillaries. Lymph nodes coordinate the traffic of cells from two sources: 
1) blood vessels, through which most lymphocytes enter lymph nodes, and 2) 
lymph vessels, which transport interstitial fluid, including DCs. 
If the lymphatic pathway is blocked, as in lymphedema, the immune system 
would be unaware of an inflammatory process occurring in the afferent tissue 
and would remain unengaged, resulting in immune failure [8] [19]. Lymphede-
ma is a condition in which the lymphatic ducts are impaired and the expression 
of acquired immunity is impossible. 
Excessive chronic inflammation and fibrosis can have a chaotic effect on the 
healing process [11]. Lymphedema results in a significant inflammatory response 
[20]. T cells comprise almost 70% of all inflammatory cells in chronic lymphe-
dema and are associated with a mixed T-helper 1 (Th1) and T-helper 2 (Th2) 
response [18] [21]. Th2 cytokine expression is markedly increased in lymphe-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  70  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
dema. Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-13) and IFNγ derived from Th1 cells have pro-
found anti-lymphangiogenic effects, inhibit lymphatic function, increase fibrosis 
and promote changes in the extracellular matrix, may impair lymphatic repair 
and regeneration by through direct effects on survival, proliferation, migration 
and formation of tubules on lymphatic endothelial cells (ELCs) [21] [22]. T lym-
phocytes migrate to the wound after inflammatory cells and macrophages after 
tissue injury during the proliferative phase of healing [11] CD4+ T lymphocytes 
can differentiate into Th1, Th2, Th17 (T helper or Th in English), or even other 
subtypes, each of which secretes a particular set of cytokines [23]. 
In tissues, macrophages are matured and activated in certain phenotypes, de-
pending on the stimulus, to acquire specialized function. M1 is characterized as 
pro-inflammatory, providing tissue damage, while the M2 population is involved 
in tissue repair, with an anti-inflammatory profile. M1 and M2 are critical for 
natural wound healing. Polarization of M1 to M2 is a vital step in wound healing 
and can be amplified by cytokines, in particular IL-4, as well as increasing the 
number of M2, resulting in elevated levels of IL-10, transforming growth fac-
tor-β, and IL-12 [8]. Subsets of T helper (Th) 1 and 2 cells and macrophages are 
closely related in such a way that they mutually regulate their differentiation [8]. 
The differentiation of Th1 cells from naive T cells is driven primarily by in-
terferon-gamma (IFN-γ). IFN-γ inhibits the differentiation of naive T cells into 
Th2 cells. When the influence of IFN-γ is weak, it is assumed that natural killer 
T cells produce interleukin (IL)-4 without being affected by dendritic cells. IL-4 
causes naive T cells to differentiate into Th2 cells that promote chronic inflamma-
tion with the help of M2 macrophages that promote fibrosis. Th2 self-produces 
IL-4, which creates a state of Th2 and M2 dominance through positive feedback. 
In the lymphedema region, dendritic cell activity is suppressed, which diminish-
es the ability of IFN-γ to inhibit Th2 cell differentiation. Fibrosis is promoted in 
response to chronic inflammation driven by Th2 cells and M2 macrophages [8] 
[19] [24]. 
Yoshida et al., 2019, presented in their work, two case reports where they ob-
tained satisfactory results in lymphedema wound treatment with the use of the 
microsurgical procedure called Lymphovenous Anastomosis, associated with 
skin grafts and cotton elastic bandage. Despite the scientific literature showing 
through results that the supermicrosurgical lymphaticvenular anastomosis has a 
valuable place in the treatment of lymphedema, with significant improvement of 
symptoms, the microsurgical procedure is limited to specific cases of lymphe-
dema, it is not the first treatment option, which is the conservative, do not ad-
dress the underlying pathophysiology of lymphedema and the long-term effects 
are still unclear [24].  
3.7. The Method of Acceleration of Science (MAC®) and Complex   
Decongestive Therapy (CDT) 
MAC® Method 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  71  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
The MAC® Method is a treatment methodology for tissue repair (integumen-
tary, musculoskeletal, bone and cartilaginous) and its concept is based on clini-
cal reasoning through three pillars: Identification, observation and interpreta-
tion of the patient’s health condition through complementary exams (image and 
biochemical) and pathognomonic signs. Clinical sovereignty directs the elabora-
tion of the physiotherapeutic diagnosis and consequently the short, medium and 
long term goals, in the treatment plan, leading it to be more effective and accu-
rate in physical-functional rehabilitation and improvement of the patient’s qual-
ity of life. 
This method uses laser and LED as a treatment tool to perform photodynamic 
therapy, through cell markers, photosensitive substances, photopharmaceuticals 
and photobiomodulation, to modulate cellular biological processes. 
According to Pinto et al. (2021), the method uses a technique for spatio- 
temporal control, similar to the “self-flying focus”, which is a behavior of the la-
ser beam in nonlinear modeling that produces an arbitrary, flexible path inten-
sity peak that can be sustained over distances comparable to the focal length. 
The bending of time over time is used, causing the parabolic profile of the wave’s 
amplitude to begin to change, tending to maintain and control the speed of the 
peak irradiance of the laser/LED, controlling the beam divergence over a long 
distance, increasing and concentrating potency and the non-declining and long-
er therapeutic window (Figure 3) [12] [19]. 
The method uses doping in two treatment modalities as Monodoses and Dos-
es. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the type of tissue, taking into account its 
density, redox states, severity and depth of tissue injury, type of microorganism 
that may be colonizing the tissue. Monodoses are subdoses. Time folds over time 
are used, time is fractioned into each wavelength. This time double can be in-
creasing or decreasing depending on the duration of the comorbidities (chronic 
or acute), the characteristics of the lesion, the objective of the treatment, the 
clinical evaluation. Dosimetry is increased or decreased depending on each case. 
Doses are fixed time folds at each wavelength. The dose is medialized. It is 
more used in organisms where the metabolism is high through a clinical evalua-
tion (such as athletes and children). 
Complex Decongestive Therapy (CDT) 
CDT or Combined Physical Therapy or Complex Decongestive Physical Ther-
apy (among others) involves a two-step treatment program that can be applied 
to children and adults, according to the International Society of Lymphology 
[15]. It consists of therapeutic procedures or guidelines, which will be performed 
according to the classification or staging of lymphedema [8]. Wound healing 
and skin and attachment care, Manual lymphatic drainage (MLD), Multilayer 
bandage (or elastic stocking/sleeve) and Myolymphokinetic exercises (before or 
after these procedures, taking care as long as the patient is wearing the multilay-
er bandage or socks elastic bands or sleeves in place). 
The first phase of treatment is aimed at maximal reduction of lymphedema 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  72  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
volume and consists of skin care, MLD (depending on lymphedema staging), 
muscle pumping exercises, and compression typically applied with a multilayer 
bandage. Phase 2 (started immediately after Phase 1) aims to conserve and optim-
ize the results obtained in Phase 1. It consists of compression by a low-stretch 
elastic stocking or sleeve, skin care, continued exercise and MLD as needed 
(Figure 4) [15]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Graphic schemes of temporal folds—therapeutic window MAC® Method. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  73  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
A                                    B                           
 
Figure 4. Patient in the two stages of treatment with Accelerated Scarring Methodolo-
gy—MAC® and Complex Decongestive Therapy (A) First phase of Complex Deconges-
tive Therapy—Multilayer bandage with short extensibility bandage; (B) Second phase of 
Complex Decongestive Therapy with flat knit elastic socks. 
4. Conclusion 
It is known that the microsurgical procedure is limited to specific cases of lym-
phedema, not being the first treatment option, being conservative, they do not 
address the underlying pathophysiology of lymphedema and the long-term ef-
fects are still unclear. More studies addressing the long-term follow-up after sur-
gical treatment are still needed. MAC associated with CDT proved to be an ef-
fective method of conservative treatment of chronic wounds in lymphedema, 
with short-term results, more affordable, promoting an improvement in the pa-
tient’s quality of life. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to the Brazilian company Ecco Fibras® in the person of Mr. Henrique 
Trajano for the scientific support of this article. 
Conflicts of Interest 
The authors declare having no conflict of interest regarding this article. 
References 
[1]  Dryden, M., Baguneid, M., Eckmann, C., Corman, S., Stephens, J., Solem, C., Li, J., 
Charbonneau, C., Baillon-Plot, N. and Haider, S. (2015) Pathophysiology and Bur-
den of Infection in Patients with Diabetes Mellitus and Peripheral Vascular Disease: 
Focus on Skin and Soft Tissue Infections. Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 21, 
S27-S32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmi.2015.03.024 
[2]  Kong, H.H. and Segre, J.A. (2012) Skin Microbiome: Looking Back to Move For-
ward. Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 132, 933-939. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2011.417 
[3]  da Silva, C.E., Repka, J.C.D., de Souza, C.J.F. and Matias, J.E.F. (2018) Effects of 
Renal Dysfunction on Healing of Colonic Anastomosis: Experimental Study in Wins-
tar Rats. Arquivos Brasileiros de Cirurgia Digestiva, 31, e1398.  
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  74  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1590/0102-672020180001e1398 
[4]  Donate-Correa, J., Luis-Rodríguez, D., Martín-Núñez, E., Tagua, V.G., Hernández- 
Carballo, C., Ferri, C., Rodríguez-Rodríguez, A.E., Mora-Fernández, C. and Navarro- 
González, J.F. (2020) Inflammatory Targets in Diabetic Nephropathy. Journal of Clin-
ical Medicine, 9, Article 58. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9020458 
[5]  da Silva, A.C., Rodrigues, M.X. and Silva, N.C.C. (2020) Methicillin-Resistant Sta-
phylococcus aureus in Food and the Prevalence in Brazil: A Review. Brazilian Jour-
nal of Microbiology, 51, 347-356. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42770-019-00168-1 
[6]  Michael, Y. and Shaukat, N.M. (2021) Erysipelas. In: StatPearls, Treasure Island 
(FL): StatPearls Publishing.  
[7]  Sapuła, M., Krankowska, D. and Wiercińska-Drapało, A. (2020) In Search of Risk 
Factors for Recurrent Erysipelas and Cellulitis of the Lower Limb: A Cross-Sectional 
Study of Epidemiological Characteristics of Patients Hospitalized due to Skin and 
Soft-Tissue Infections. Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases, 2020, 
Article ID: 130723. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/1307232 
[8]  6th Latin American Consensus for the Treatment of Lymphedema: Treatment Guide/ 
José Luis Ciucci. (2017) General Coordination of Enrique Angel Peralta. Autonomous 
City of Buenos Aires, Nayarit.  
[9]  Donate-Correa, J., Ferri, C.M., Sánchez-Quintana, F., Pérez-Castro, A., González- 
Luis, A., Martín-Núñez, E., Mora-Fernández, C. and Navarro-González, J.F. (2021) 
Inflammatory Cytokines in Diabetic Kidney Disease: Pathophysiologic and Thera-
peutic Implications. Frontiers in Medicine (Lausanne), 7, Article ID: 628289.  
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.628289 
[10]  Xie, P., Young, M.W., Bian, H., Niknam-Bienia, S., Hong, S., Mustoe, T.A. and Ga-
liano, R.D. (2019) Renal Dysfunction Aggravated Impaired Cutaneous Wound Heal-
ing in Diabetic Mice. Wound Repair and Regeneration, 27, 49-58. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/wrr.12682 
[11]  Viigimaa, M., Sachinidis, A., Toumpourleka, M., Koutsampasopoulos, K., Alliksoo, 
S. and Titma, T. (2020) Macrovascular Complications of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. 
Current Vascular Pharmacology, 18, 110-116.  
https://doi.org/10.2174/1570161117666190405165151 
[12]  Pinto, M.V.M., Vilardi, N., Petrone, F., Sampaio, A.R., Fortune, E., Passos, T.P., 
Mayer, P.F., Oliveira Junior, M.P. and Baron, M. (2021) Analysis of the MAC® 
Healing Acceleration Methodology in a Muscle Injury. International Journal of De-
velopment Research, 11, 51670-51675. 
[13]  Guidelines of the Brazilian Diabetes Society, 2019-2020.  
https://portaldeboaspraticas.iff.fiocruz.br/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Diretrizes-S
ociedade-Brasileira-de-Diabetes-2019-20201.pdf  
[14]  Veronesi (2015) Treatise on Infectious Diseases. 5th Edition, Ed. Atheneu, São 
Paulo, 1095, 1158.  
[15]  Executive Committee of the International Society of Lymphology (2020) The Diag-
nosis and Treatment of Peripheral Lymphedema: 2020 Consensus Document of the 
International Society of Lymphology. Lymphology, 53, 3-19. 
https://doi.org/10.2458/lymph.4649 
[16]  Jiang, X., Nicolls, M.R., Tian, W. and Rockson, S.G. (2018) Lymphatic Dysfunction, 
Leukotrienes, and Lymphedema. Annual Review of Physiology, 80, 49-70. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-022516-034008 
[17]  Granato, A., Reis, B.S., Santos, B.M., Fucs, R., Canto, F.B., Nakaya, H.I., Nóbrega, A. 
and Bellio, M. (2017) Crucial Role for T Cell-Intrinsic IL-18R-MyD88 Signaling in 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  75  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

M. V. de Mello Pinto et al. 
 
Cognate Immune Response to Intracellular Parasite Infection. eLife, 6, e30883. 
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.30883 
[18]  Kataru, R.P., Baik, J.E., Park, H.J., et al. (2019) Regulation of Immune Function by 
the Lymphatic System in Lymphedema. Frontiers in Immunology, 10, Article 470. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2019.00470 
[19]  Pinto, M.V.M. (2011) Fototerapia-Aspectos Clinicos da Reabilitação. Andreoli, Edi- 
ção. 
[20]  Savetsky, I.L., Ghanta, S., Gardenier, J.C., Torrisi, J.S., Garcia Nores, G.D., Hespe, 
G.E., Nitti, M.D., Kataru, R.P. and Mehrara, B.J. (2015) Th2 Cytokines Inhibit Lym-
phangiogenesis. PLOS ONE, 10, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0126908 
[21]  Eleanor, C.M. and Terence, J.R. (1994) Lymphedema and Wound Healing. Clinics 
in Dermatology, 12, 89-93. https://doi.org/10.1016/0738-081X(94)90260-7 
[22]  Pérez-Morales, R.E., Del Pino, M.D., Valdivielso, J.M., Ortiz, A., Mora-Fernández, 
C. and Navarro-González, J.F. (2019) Inflammation in Diabetic Kidney Disease. 
Nephron, 143, 12-16. https://doi.org/10.1159/000493278 
[23]  Kataru, R.P., Kim, H., Jang, C., Choi, D.K., Koh, B.I., Kim, M., Gollamudi, S., Kim, 
Y.K., Lee, S.H. and Koh, G.Y. (2011) T lymphocytes Negatively Regulate Lymph 
Node Lymphatic Vessel Formation. Immunity, 34, 96-107. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2010.12.016 
[24]  Yoshida, S., Koshima, I., Hamada, Y., Sasaki, A., Fujioka, Y., Nagamatsu, S., Yokota, 
K., Harima, M. and Yamashita, S. (2019) Lymphovenous Anastomosis Aids Wound 
Healing in Lymphedema: Relationship between Lymphedema and Delayed Wound 
Healing from a View of Immune Mechanisms. Advances in Wound Care (New Ro-
chelle), 8, 263-269. https://doi.org/10.1089/wound.2018.0871 
 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2022.114005  76  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE