Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine, 2019, 8, 1-4 
http://www.scirp.org/journal/ojrm 
ISSN Online: 2169-2521 
ISSN Print: 2169-2513 
 
 
 
Concerns about Diabetic Foot Wounds 
Denis E. Solomon 
9B Somerville Road, Wigan, Lancs, England 
 
 
 
How to cite this paper: Solomon, D.E.  Abstract 
(2019)  Concerns  about  Diabetic  Foot 
Wounds. Open Journal of Regenerative  This paper in a medical sense can be described as a case report. The diabetic 
Medicine, 8, 1-4.  foot wounds of a relative, over 70 years of age, with Type I diabetes were so 
https://doi.org/10.4236/ojrm.2019.81001 
grievous and the medical treatment was so protracted that success could not 
 
be assured. There was a danger of amputation. The one outstanding feature 
Received: February 9, 2019 
Accepted: March 28, 2019  was that the private application of an antifungal spray, between the toes of 
Published: March 31, 2019  both feet without prescribed oral mycologic agents, seemed to make an inex-
 
plicable difference to the final outcome. In addition, a viewpoint drawn was 
Copyright © 2019 by author(s) and  
Scientific Research Publishing Inc.  that the efficacy of antibiotic therapies may be compromised by the presence 
This work is licensed under the Creative  of invisible fungal etiology. 
Commons Attribution International    
License (CC BY 4.0).  Keywords 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/   
Open Access Type I Diabetes, Wounds on Soles, Anti-Fungal Spray, Light Weight  
   
Dressings, Efficacy of Antibiotic Therapy 
 
1. Introduction 
This paper resulted from an unexpected series of events. I was idly reading a re-
view by Wukich et al. (2013) [1] and saw a photograph of a foot wound in their 
Figure 2 and its legend entitled “Photograph of patient with a severe, limb- 
threatening necrotizing diabetic foot Infection’’. To my eyes, there was a fungal 
infection present, superimposed on the toes, but when I searched the paper for 
mycologic agents used in treatment, I could find none. Intrigued, I conducted a 
literature search using the phrase “cultures of diabetic foot wounds with fungal 
infections”. PubMed (NIH) search engine could only supply seven published ar-
ticles. The latest was an article by Ozurk et al. (2019) [2] seeking to highlight the 
neglected causative agent of fungal etiology in diabetic foot infection. 
In ageing human skin, elastin contained in the reticular dermis has a half life 
of 74 years Weiss (2011) [3] and with its loss, skin becomes more fragile. The 
craggy facial appearance of the elderly (over 75s) is a direct result. Add auto-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2019.81001  Mar. 31, 2019  1  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

D. E. Solomon 
 
nomic neuropathy and dry skin, more susceptible to cracking Holloway (2019) 
[4], to the mix and healing becomes more of a problem because of the reduced 
production of dermal fibroblasts and collagen resulting in a diminished reticular 
dermis. These points should be taken into consideration because the normal skin 
structure of earlier life is not present anymore. Instead, it is diminished and thin 
and vulnerable to both bacterial and fungal infection; the latter from the crack-
ing skin between toes. Therefore, the medical pursuit of only bacterial infection 
with the use of antibiotics needs careful reconsideration. At present, it is not 
known whether fungal infection impedes the efficacy of antibiotics, but as will be 
described below, the targeted application of an antifungal spray seemed to cause 
some amelioration of the wounds. Because of patient confidentiality, I cannot 
list the prescribed medications, but it must be assumed that standard medical 
care was applicable.  
2. Discussion 
The background to my interest in diabetic foot wounds was aroused by an eld-
erly relative with Type I diabetes with quite grievous wounds on the soles of both 
feet (See Figure 1). She was morbidly obese and needed a walking aid. For years, 
she was wheel chair-bound or in bed. One foot infection had spread to her ankle 
and there was clearly observable tissue degradation. Attending nurses at one 
hospital had expressed the real possibility of amputation.  
I had visited her at three major hospitals and four nursing homes in the State 
of Louisiana, USA over a six-year period and had silently observed the complete 
failure of debridement, offloading, glycaemic control and concomitant antibiotic 
therapy. As a last resort, she sought maggot therapy at a specialist hospital. This 
treatment had an immense and impressive effect of cleaning and sealing the 
wounds with a thin layer of epidermis and her ankle area healed quite rapidly. 
Unfortunately, immobilisation for six weeks did not immediately follow (to al-
low keratinisation) and the wounds on the soles of her feet reopened. She was 
attended at home by a nurse who changed her dressings twice a week. There was 
continual offloading and glycaemic control. There was no medical prescription 
for a mycologic agent. However, a personal decision was made to deploy an 
over-the-counter antifungal spray named Lotrimin® containing 2% miconazole 
nitrate to counter any present Candida species between the toes and possibly 
elsewhere within the cracked skin. This was applied once a day, for four months, 
excluding those two days per week when her home nurse attended. The manu-
facturer provides a warning on the can’s label that the spray is intended for ex-
ternal use only. However, when this spray is used on cracked skin between the 
toes it will become invasive. In the opinion of the home nurse, wounds became 
stabilised and seemed to improve after the application of the spray. Wound 
management with normal dressings continued as before. The one difference was 
that a light bandage, with applied antifungal cream on one side, was looped be-
tween the toes of both feet and refreshed appropriately. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2019.81001  2  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

D. E. Solomon 
 
 
Figure 1. Diabetic wound on sole of one foot. The 
other foot had a comparable wound on the sole. 
 
Fluconazole 150 mg is the normal oral medical prescription for fungal infec-
tion, as described by Chellan et al. (2012) [5] because it is believed that this 
medication works efficiently. This paper dares to suggest that additionally, an 
antifungal spray should be directed between the toes to provide a preventative 
seal to ageing, cracked skin brought about by autonomic neuropathy. 
Bed bound after a cerebral stroke, with a calorie-controlled diet and regular 
checks of blood sugar levels, wound care continued. This author had observed a 
variety of applied dressings at different hospitals and nursing homes over the 
years, which to my eyes were weight bearing and inappropriate. I mused that if 
attending physicians had seen under the microscope, stripped human epidermis 
disassembling into epidermal rosettes (Solomon 2012) [6], they would not sanc-
tion weight bearing dressings and sponges (to absorb seepage) on any cutaneous 
wound including pressure ulcers. At her post-stroke nursing home, a small blue 
non-adhesive pad was applied, sealed over with a transparent tape and an ankle 
length flimsy stocking with open toes was overlaid. After 3 short months, her 
wounds were fully healed. It was observed that the diameter of her wounds de-
creased to a fraction of their original size, before finally being completely healed. 
At no time over the years, was venous hypertension mentioned. 
3. Conclusions   
My relative’s wounds on the soles of her feet completely healed which gives a lie 
to the medical mantra that “diabetic wounds do not heal”. The spray, as opposed 
to a skin cream, could quickly penetrate and target any deep seated area of un-
known fungal infection, thereby allowing prescribed antibiotics to exert their 
fulsome effects. This conclusion is inevitably drawn after the failure of a range of 
antibiotic therapies (some were culture-specific undoubtedly) over several years. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2019.81001  3  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

D. E. Solomon 
 
Research is needed to confirm that fungal infections should be assuaged, before 
standard antibiotic care is prescribed. Also, whether the medical dependence on 
oral mycologic agents can be undisputably justified (that is, do they reach the 
target areas?) and when exactly they should be prescribed for immediate use. 
Finally, there is an outstanding question. In a last ditch attempt to prevent am-
putation, did the attending physicians consider placing a bag of medical maggots 
over the necrotizing tissue shown in Figure 2, Wukich et al. (2013)? It should be 
noted that there was no looped bandage between the toes, as was described ear-
lier. 
Diabetic wounds present an ongoing challenge to attending physicians. It is to 
be hoped that this paper makes a small contribution to the future success of 
healing of diabetic foot wounds.  
Conflicts of Interest 
The author declares no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this pa-
per. 
References 
[1]  Wukich, D.K., Armstrong, D.G., Attinger, C.E., Boulton, A.J.M., Burns, P.R., Fryk-
berg, R.G., Hellman, R., Kim, P.J., Lipsky, B.A., Pile, J.C., Pinzur, M.S. and Simin-
erio, L. (2013) Inpatient Management of Diabetic Foot Disorders: A Clinical Guide. 
Diabetes Care, 36, 2862-2871. https://doi.org/10.2337/dc12-2712 
[2]  Ozturk, A.M., Tasbakan, M., Metin, D.Y., Yener, C., Uysal, S., Yilidirim, S.I., Erlam, 
I., Pullukcu, H., Arda, B. and Cetinkalp, S. (2019) A Neglected Causative Agent in 
Diabetic Foot Infection: A Retrospective Evaluation of 13 Patients with Fungal Eti-
ology. Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences, 49, 81-86.  
https://doi.org/10.3906/sag-1809-74 
[3]  Weiss, A.S. (2011) The Science of Elastin. Elastagen Pty Ltd., 1-8. 
[4]  Holloway, S. (2019) Skin Considerations for Older Adults with Wounds. British 
Journal of Community Nursing, 24, S15-S19.  
https://doi.org/10.12968/bjcn.2019.24.Sup6.S15 
[5]  Chellan, G., Neethu, K., Varma, A.K., Mangalanandan, T.S., Shashikala, S., Dinesh, 
K.R., Sundaram, K.R., Varma, N., Jayakumar, R.V., Bal, A., Kumar, H. (2012) Tar-
geted Treatment of Invasive Fungal Infections Accelerates Healing of Foot Wounds 
in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetic Medicine, 29, e255-e262.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-5491.2012.03574.x 
[6]  Solomon, D.E. (2012) Mimicry of a Natural, Living Intra-Epidermal Micropattern 
Used in Guided Tissue Regeneration of the Human Epidermis. Journal of Devel-
opmental Biology and Tissue Engineering, 4, 1-7.  
https://doi.org/10.5897/JDBTE11.023 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2019.81001  4  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE