Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine, 2018, 7, 1-17 
http://www.scirp.org/journal/ojrm 
ISSN Online: 2169-2521 
ISSN Print: 2169-2513 
 
 
 
Psychological Issues for Patients Undergoing 
Stem Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine 
Natasha Braunsteiner1, E. Russell Vickers1,2,3*, Rachel Shparberg1,4 
1Clinical Stem Cells Pty Ltd., Sydney, Australia 
2Department of Anaesthesia & Pain Management, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 
3Clinical Research Center, Combak Hospital, Hangzhou, China 
4School of Medical Sciences, Discipline of Physiology, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 
           
 
 
How to cite this paper: Braunsteiner, N.,  Abstract 
Vickers,  E.R.  and  Shparberg,  R.  (2018) 
Psychological Issues for Patients Undergoing  Stem cell therapy is a relatively new treatment modality in the field of rege-
Stem Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medi- nerative medicine. The therapy is gaining increased awareness and accep-
cine. Open Journal of Regenerative Medi- tance by the public. There are multiple factors that contribute to a stem cell 
cine, 7, 1-17. 
procedure for regenerative medicine in order for it to be successful. One of 
https://doi.org/10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001 
  these factors is a patient’s mental health and psychological state. The role and 
Received: February 5, 2018  significance of a counsellor/psychologist will be examined as a crucial part of 
Accepted: March 27, 2018  the regenerative medicine team. Pre-existing issues of depression, anxiety, 
Published: March 30, 2018 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), addiction, low self-esteem and high 
 
Copyright © 2018 by authors and   levels of stress could adversely affect outcomes. For example, fears and pho-
Scientific Research Publishing Inc.  bias are counter-productive for planned regenerative therapy. The counsellor 
This work is licensed under the Creative  must also assess and determine that the patient is mentally and psychologi-
Commons Attribution International  
cally healthy. In addition, advice is necessary for the patient to have realistic 
License (CC BY 4.0). 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/    expectations in order for them to be eligible for treatment. Some patients are 
Open Access not suitable for stem cells and other regenerative procedures until psycholog-
   
ical treatment is successful, particularly in body image dysmorphia. A com-
prehensive psychological assessment is needed and answers must be provided 
for patients by the counsellor during all phases of the treatment. 
 
Keywords 
Stem Cells, Regenerative Medicine, Counselling, Psychology, Mental Health, 
Depression, Anxiety, Stress 
 
1. Introduction 
Stem cell therapy is a relatively new treatment approach for medical conditions 
involving regenerative medicine. Emerging evidence demonstrating safety and 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  Mar. 30, 2018  1  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
efficacy is providing further impetus for clinicians and their patients to consider 
cell based therapies. One developing area is stem cells for treating chronic pain 
conditions such as osteoarthritis and neuropathic pain. However, a number of 
psychological issues continue to arise from patients receiving stem cells, for ex-
ample, patient enquiries about the potential of stem cells to cause cancer and 
genetic mutations being introduced into a host patient from allogeneic cells. 
Furthermore, the simple injection of stem cells, local anesthetic and saline for 
tumescent liposuction in the case of adipose derived stem cells can still initiate 
extreme  anxiety in a needle phobic  patient. Consequently, the  presence  of 
co-existent negative psychosocial variables with the medical condition to be 
treated can significantly impact patient outcomes as in the case of improving 
chronic pain states. The gold standard approach to medical treatment is a multi-
disciplinary assessment of medical, psychological and physical factors, termed a 
biopsychosocial paradigm. Chronic pain is one of the key reasons for the public 
to investigate stem cell therapy as the current conventional approach utilizes 
medication including antidepressants and anticonvulsant drugs. However, these 
drugs such as amitriptyline, pregabalin and gabapentin have a relatively poor 
outcome ratio when comparing the number needed to treat (NNT) of 1:3-8 with 
the number needed to harm (NNH) of 1:2  
(http://cochranelibrary-wiley.com/cochranelibrary) i.e. the public are twice as 
likely to incur adverse drug side effects compared with pain reduction. This is of 
particular concern to patients as possible drug side effects include significant 
weight gain, drowsiness, paradoxical depression and anxiety, alopecia, skin rash, 
increased suicidal ideation and peripheral neuropathy. Moreover, drug toler-
ance, drug interaction and addiction to opioid medication are ongoing worrying 
issues for the medical doctor. Alternative cell based therapies are an attractive 
option when safety and efficacy have been established for the individual patient 
and the treating doctor. Moreover, governments are increasingly concerned due 
to the prevalence and high socioeconomic burden of pain.  
The rise in cosmetic medicine is one further increasing trend where stem cells 
are used despite the paucity of evidence [1]. The purpose of this article is to illu-
strate various potential psychosocial issues that may develop in the clinical phase 
that are specific to stem cell therapy. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first 
article to list patient concerns of stem cell therapy and provide a framework of 
evidence based treatments from other established areas of medicine. The chronic 
pain model is used to list potential psychosocial issues due to the increasing use 
of stem cells as a treatment. The authors are core members of dedicated clinical 
stem cell team performing this therapy with combined 20+ years in stem cell 
training, research, treatments and publications. NB specializes in counselling 
and the psychological assessment of patients undergoing stem cell therapy, RS is 
a developmental cell biologist with extensive laboratory research in stem cells, 
and ERV is a surgeon who specializes in treating patients with autologous me-
senchymal stem cells with publications in this field. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  2  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
The comprehensive assessment of psychological issues of the patient is an 
imperative component to consider by the clinician for any treatment. This in-
volves discussing with the patient their unresolved past issues, current problems 
and identifying potential future aspects that could negate treatment outcomes. 
Stem cell therapy holds a unique position in this regard. Autologous stem cell 
therapy is considered a safe and highly valued treatment for use in pediatric leu-
kemia patients since its institution in the 1980s. Positive exposure from media 
sources for its use is underpinned by extensive medical research publications. 
This generates confidence in the public domain for its use in other medical con-
ditions. However, in any treatment there are possible complications and risks 
that can and do arise. Even in rare circumstances, a complication can generate 
extensive negative media to the public and consequently with the loss of confi-
dence, and increased individual stress and anxiety for a prospective patient 
should stem cells be considered. An example of this occurred when stem cells 
were injected into the face of a patient for cosmetic reasons and minor bone 
splinters developed around the eyelids that were simply removed. The patient 
had  previous  injections  of  hydroxyapatite  filler  from  another  surgeon  that 
coaxed the stem cells to differentiate to osteoblasts instead of fibroblasts. The 
response from certain media outlets was to create a sensational headline for the 
public using terms such as “Botched, gruesome, bone fragments grinding against 
each other” (Figure 1). 
The importance of allaying this type of anxiety is necessary for successful 
outcomes. Stem cell therapy is a new treatment modality for most medical doc-
tors and allied health practitioners such as dentists. Their role is supported by 
the use of counsellors and psychologists to achieve a successful “human” out-
come rather than a simple “physiological improvement of the disease”. For ex-
ample, in the area of chronic pain, the biopsychosocial approach provides an 
excellent  framework  of  multidisciplinary  assessment  for  stem  cell  therapy. 
Simply reducing pain intensity in a chronic pain patient without treating depres-
sion, anxiety, stress and an addiction to prescription drugs leads to failure. 
Treating the psychosocial disease is as important as the medical treatment. 
In the case of allogeneic stem cells further anxiety and many questions from 
the patient is likely to occur. This is no different when considering drugs with 
potential side effects such as weight gain, sedation, drowsiness and hair loss 
from frequently used tricyclic antidepressants for neuropathic pain. Moreover, 
the list of side effects from other drugs include acne, loss of libido, suicidal id-
eation, gastric ulceration, lethargy, impaired renal and liver function, blindness  
 
 
Figure 1. Internet headline of a complication from stem cell treatment to the face. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  3  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
and hearing loss. The purpose of this article is to outline, identify and indicate 
the treatment approach for the numerous psychosocial variables that are likely 
to arise when the clinician is providing stem cell treatment. 
2. Explaining Basic Scientific Principles of Stem Cells to   
Patients 
Stem cell and regenerative therapies have received much attention over the years 
for their potential to rejuvenate and repair damaged and aged tissue. The field of 
stem cells is rapidly evolving and as technology improves, so too does the pros-
pect of treating a variety of conditions. However, it is important to appreciate 
that the field of stem cell therapy and regenerative medicine is still emerging, 
and there is much to learn about how stem cells interact with their environment 
to repair damaged and diseased tissue. As previously shown in the media (Figure 
1), negative comments undermine the true therapeutic benefit of stem cells. An 
explanation of stem cells from their origin, different types and donor sources 
(autologous or allogeneic) helps reduce uncertainty and anxiety about the nature 
of the planned treatment. The following outline is provided for the clinician to 
help the patient in understanding the basic principles in stem cell therapy. 
A stem cell is a unique cell that, unlike normal body (somatic) cells, is 1) ca-
pable of self-renewal over extended periods of time (i.e. it is able to stay as a 
stem cell over multiple cell divisions) and 2) maintains a level of potency (i.e. an 
ability to differentiate into another type of cell when the conditions are favora-
ble). There are four main types of stem cells that patients may be aware of in-
cluding embryonic, adult, induced pluripotent and cancer stem cells. It is there-
fore imperative to explain the nature of therapeutic stem cells from cancer stem 
cells to a patient to prevent anxiety and stress from a lack of knowledge. Em-
bryonic stem cells are those derived from the early embryo. These cells are plu-
ripotent, which means that they are capable of differentiating into any of the 
cells that make up the structural and physiological components of an adult, and 
support foetal development. For ethical reasons embryonic stem cells are rarely 
used for treatments. Adult stem cells are multipotent in nature, which means 
that they are capable of restricted differentiation into cell types within their li-
neage of origin: For example, neural stem cells can differentiate into neurons 
and glia of the central and peripheral nervous stems, but have lost the ability to 
form, for example, skin cells. Induced pluripotent stem cells are derived from 
somatic cells that, in theory have lost the ability to differentiate, but are repro-
grammed back to an “embryonic stem cell-like state” (Figure 2). Cancer stem 
cells are those derived from tumours that have the ability, like a healthy stem 
cell, to self-renew and differentiate, and often form the basis of cancer develop-
ment in patients. For a review of each type of stem cell see Batlle et al. [2]. 
Stem cell therapies in several countries can be administered to a patient pro-
vided that they are autologous in nature (i.e. the cells are derived from the pa-
tient and re-administered back to the same patient), the cells are minimally  
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  4  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
 
Figure 2. Derivation, types and differentiation potential of pluripotent and multipotent embryonic-, foetal- and adult-derived 
stem cells. 1) Embryonic stem cells are derived from the inner cell mass of the early blastocyst-stage embryo and can differen-
tiate into all somatic and germ-line cell types that form the human body from each of the three multipotent definitive germ 
layers (endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm). Stem cell therapy using embryonic stem cells is currently not permitted in many 
countries. Rather, these stem cells are predominantly used for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying embryonic 
development and cell differentiation. 2) Induced pluripotent stem cells are those that are derived from mature cell types (for 
example, skin cells) and are reprogrammed back to an embryonic stem cell-like state. Once reprogrammed, iPSCs can then 
differentiate into somatic cells of each of the definitive endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm germ layers. iPSC technology has 
yet to efficiently progress to the clinic, however, there is the prospect that this technology will be the face of personalized rege-
nerative therapy in the future. 3) Adult stem cells are multipotent cells that are derived from stem cell niches in foetal and 
adult organs and tissues. Some examples include: mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) and 
dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs). These cells are conventionally restricted to differentiating into cell types from their lineage of 
origin. For example, MSCs are derived from the mesoderm lineage, and can therefore differentiate into cells of this lineage. 
DPSCs are derived from the neural crest lineage and can differentiate into a range of craniofacial structures including muscle, 
bones, peripheral nervous tissue etc. Currently, autologous cell therapy using adult stem cells (derived from the patient and 
delivered back into the patient) are at the forefront of therapeutic and regenerative medicine. 4) Cancer stem cells are unique 
cells located within tumours that possess similar characteristics to normal stem cells: They can self-renew (curved arrow), but 
unlike normal stem cells, cancer stem cells are genetically unstable and therefore self-renew and proliferate uncontrollably, 
often transdifferentiating into a mix of different cell types from different cell lineages, as well as being able to metastasize un-
der appropriate conditions. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  5  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
manipulated and the entire procedure is performed by or under the supervision 
of a clinician. Not all conditions are considered proven therapies yet. In fact, to 
date, only certain blood, skin and vision stem cell-based treatments have been 
approved and are recognized as safe and efficient treatments, as per rigorous 
clinical trial results. Nevertheless, conditions such as arthritis, degenerative con-
ditions, autoimmune disorders and chronic pain are showing promising results 
from stem cell therapies, particularly from a type of adult stem cell known as a 
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC). These therapies however are still under scientific 
investigation and are thus not routinely offered as medically-approved therapies. 
This frustrates patients, as many of these innovative therapies have shown 
promising results, but the therapies are expensive and difficult to gain access to. 
At the same time, MSCs are often advertised as the “cure all” stem cell, mislead-
ing patients and medical practitioners and thus shaping wrong perceptions of 
stem cell therapies. It is therefore necessary to provide patients and medical 
practitioners with information regarding both the benefits and limitations of 
stem cells and associated therapies. 
3. Unrealistic Expectations and Perceived Failure of   
Treatment 
It is imperative that an initial psychological consultation with a patient is con-
ducted before any procedural treatment such as tissue harvesting for stem cells 
and the re-administration of the manufactured product containing isolated 
stem cells. Most research conducted on the expectations and satisfaction with 
treatment has been qualitative, using psychometric instruments and question-
naires to investigate different types of expectations [3]. Ryan et al. [4] conducted 
a dental study to measure treatment expectations and their results showed that 
multiple physical improvements were expected of both increased function (cor-
rect occlusion for mastication) and improved esthetics (“straight teeth”). Posi-
tive nonphysical (psychological) changes from an anticipated good physical 
outcome that were expected included an improvement in emotions, patients 
were expecting to be happier, more confident and relaxed and that the thought 
of treatment was positive as it would aid their current perceived defects of misa-
ligned teeth. Not surprisingly, psychological expectations about changes in ap-
pearance ranged from wanting to be normal to expectations of wanting to be 
perfect and unrecognizable. The study showed patients had a desire to become a 
better version of themselves and that treatment would be able to achieve this. 
The preliminary psychological analysis before treatment should evaluate all areas 
of the patient’s life [5]. It is not uncommon for some patients to present with 
unrealistic expectations and thoughts and the role of the counsellor/psychologist 
is to change negative undermining thoughts of “needing 100% cure or perfec-
tion” to more realistic healthy expectations. Verbal and written questions allow 
both clinician and patient the time to list and respond to possible difficulties of a 
personal nature [6]. A standard set of questions can be given and then further in 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  6  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
depth time allocated where patients may present with their own set of questions. 
For cosmetic stem cells, idiosyncratic thoughts and even photos of what they 
wish to look like should be viewed by the clinician. It is imperative the counsel-
lor address these types of thoughts and the areas of concern should be rechecked 
prior to stem cells. The role of the counsellor is to confidently reply to the com-
mon questions, solve evolving issues of worry and assess the individual needs of 
each patient through qualitative analysis [7].  
Financial issues can be an important area for the counsellor to discuss with 
each patient. Stem cell therapy in most countries relies on the patient to pay for 
the treatment as it is a new therapy that governments and health insurance pro-
viders have yet to acknowledge for monetary reimbursement. Subsequently the 
expense, often high, incurred by the patient may cause similar high expectations 
from the therapy. Timely and prudent advice from the clinician to the patient 
should be given regarding a realistic outcome. Another situation is where the pa-
tient judges their own autologous stem cells as a “natural therapy” and s/he is 
more likely to be compliant in pre- and postoperative care information.  
4. Assessing Depression, Anxiety and Stress 
The psychological assessment of the patient considering stem cell therapy is an 
important component in the clinical work up. Depression, anxiety and stress are 
variables that can dramatically inhibit treatment outcomes. A simple, non-invasive 
and accurate tool for measuring the psychological profile is through the use of a 
questionnaire such as the depression, anxiety and stress scale (DASS-21). The 
DASS-21 is a well-established instrument for measuring depression, anxiety and 
stress with good reliability and validity [8]. The DASS-21 was developed to 
measure the constructs of depression and anxiety and to address the failure of 
early emotional measures in discriminating between anxiety and depression [9]. 
It is an economical pencil-and-paper instrument and reduces administrative 
time by taking five minutes to complete and has been widely used in clinical en-
vironments. The DASS-21 is provided by counsellors and psychologists during a 
structured clinical interview [10]. Since its publication in 1995 the DASS-21 has 
been used in numerous types of research such as early life stress and adult emo-
tional experiences, chronic and acute pain patients, addictions and mental ill-
nesses [11]. The patient should have baseline results recorded prior to treatment 
and then be repeated at regular post-surgery intervals. This will help the clini-
cian to monitor the patients’ mental and psychological state during the entire 
course of therapy and record how the patient is coping with the phases of stem 
cell rehabilitation where improvement can take several months to achieve mea-
ningful and visual improvement (Table 1). 
5. Psychological and Psychiatric Patient Profiles as   
Exclusions for Stem Cell Therapy 
A psychological assessment should be performed during the first phase of the  
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  7  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
Table 1. Description of psychological terms that can be involved in stem cell therapy. 
Psychological Term  Description 
Pain can bring on depression which can affect the patient in multiple 
aspects of their life. It is common for the depression to be a  
secondary symptom of the pain, and by reducing the pain intensity 
then the depression subsides. Symptomatic depression can be  
Depression 
treated in the same way as general depression as it effects the patient 
in the same way. Symptoms of depression include a change in  
appetite, fatigue, a sense of worthlessness, sleep problems,  
loss of motivation, and feeling sad and withdrawing. 
Anxiety can affect a patient in quite a physical way from  
Anxiety  increased heart rate, rapid breathing, perspiration,  
panic attacks, tightening of the chest, tremors and shaking. 
Stress can affect all aspects including emotions, behavior, thinking 
ability and physical health. No part of the body is immune but  
Stress  because people handle stress differently, symptoms of stress can vary. 
Stress is a common issue observed in patients with chronic pain and 
the higher the stress, the higher the pain intensity score. 
It is common for a patient to experience PTSD and persistent pain as 
co-morbidities. The patient may fear doctors, dentists, professionals, 
Post-Traumatic Stress 
medical and surgical procedures that can increase pain. In addition, 
Disorder (PTSD) 
pain can trigger the PTSD and can cause avoidance, nightmares, flash 
backs, and increased stress and anxiety levels. 
Patients seeking stem cell therapy may have an addiction, for  
example an excessive and frequent consumption of pain medication. 
A further addiction in pain patients is inappropriate drug use as a 
Addiction 
method for escape and distraction. The patient begins to 
self-medicate using alcohol, prescription drugs, and illicit drugs  
such as cocaine and cannabis. 
Body dysmorphic disorder is preoccupation with one or more  
perceived defects or flaws in his/her physical appearance that are not 
observable or appear slight to others. At some point during the 
course of the disorder, the individual has performed repetitive  
Body Dysmorphic   behaviors, for example mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin 
Disorder (BDD)  picking, reassurance seeking behavior and continually comparing 
his/herself with that of others. This preoccupation can cause  
significant distress or impairment in the social, occupational,  
or other important areas of functioning. However,  
preoccupation in this context does not concern body fat or weight. 
In terminal disease states and chronic pain there are increased  
Suicide  suicidal tendencies. It is important that a suicide risk  
assessment is performed with these patients. 
 
stem cell consultation process, along with the medical check list for patient sui-
tability. During this consultation the counsellor should carefully observe patient 
behavior and listen to their answers from a set of specific questions focused on 
all aspects of their mental and psychological state. There are several patient pro-
files that either potentially exclude patients, or requires intensive therapy prior 
to the treatment phase. Patients with conditions such as uncontrolled schizoph-
renia, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, an-
xiety, anorexia, body dysmorphic disorder and addiction should not be consi-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  8  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
dered eligible for stem cell treatment [12]. In addition, high levels of stress or 
constant background stress, although prevalent in society, may prevent a suc-
cessful outcome. PTSD patients may need long term psychological treatment 
with an extended timeframe before they are eligible for stem cells. The doctor 
and psychologist jointly need to be satisfied that the patient is ready for the stem 
cell intervention (Figure 3). 
6. Fear and Apprehension from Stem Cell Therapy 
Several fears about stem cells may trigger apprehension of the proposed treat-
ment. Typical questions asked by a patient can be “what if I am given another 
person’s stem cells with unknown DNA mutations” or “I am worried I may get 
cancer from stem cells”. These are real concerns and the stem cell team com-
prising doctor, psychologist and stem cell scientist must provide a clear under-
standing of the relative risks of all aspects of treatment. The doctor must provide 
procedural risks such as swelling, pain and discomfort, prolonged bleeding and 
risk of post operative infection from the donor site. The psychologist advises the 
patient of realistic goals and outcomes, and techniques to rebut stress. The stem 
cell scientist reassures the patient that extensive laboratory validation tests are 
conducted on the cells to confirm cell viability, cell numbers and stem cell CD 
markers.  
As stem cell therapy is a relatively new procedure it is likely that multiple 
fears and concerns would be brought forward by presenting patients. Further  
 
 
Figure 3. Psychological aspects of stem cell therapy for therapeutic treatment using a chronic pain model. The network map de-
monstrates the complex interconnectedness of psychosocial variables when treating a medical disease. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  9  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
reassurance should be given that government legislation in most countries places 
a high emphasis on safety from medical procedures, medical devices and drugs 
used for treatments. Higher levels of safety and reassurance are met when using 
autologous stem cells as there is no risk of cell rejection and this information 
should be explained. In the case of allogeneic cells then a higher level of potential 
risk should be openly discussed with the patient and the “significant other” 
(partner, relative or friend). Providing published high quality research articles 
demonstrating safety can dispel unfounded fears. In addition, the medical doctor 
should conduct blood screens on patients to determine if there is any risk from 
the patient such as transmissible disease to other patients or clinic staff. Some 
patients will question the sterility of instruments used. Providing evidence of a 
validated sterilizer or using disposable single use instrument packs will reassure 
the patient. 
7. Cancer and Stem Cells   
As mentioned above there are strict and thorough initial tests and screening that 
takes place before the stem cell treatment. However, in the unlikely event that 
the screening tests are not performed or validated then the patient can possibly 
receive stem cells from a diseased site or unknown donor, thereby posing a po-
tential risk of developing a disease or illness. Like any situation where blood 
and/or bodily fluids are shared there is a risk of developing a complication. 
Moreover, where recipient sites contain autologous or allogeneic cancer stem 
cells then the risk can be magnified due to stem cell expansion (increased cell 
number) and the migration of stem cells potentially causing metastatic spread 
[13]. Cancer contains cancer stem cells, and poorly differentiated cancer cells 
can increase in number quickly. One of the key contraindications to stem cell 
therapy is untreated cancer. In patients with suspected cancer then thorough 
screening is needed with clinical tests, radiographic examinations, cancer bio-
marker assays and genetic testing for a risk evaluation.  
8. How to Manage the Desperate Patient Seeking Stem Cell   
Treatment 
Patients may catastrophize when given a diagnosis concerning conditions such 
as cancer, multiple sclerosis and motor neuron disease. These conditions have 
different levels of malignancy and disease severity. The treating clinician and 
psychologist should contact the patient’s specialist to record the “real life expec-
tancy” compared with a possible exaggerated report from the patient. When 
dealing with the desperate patient it is important that you acknowledge their 
emotions and feelings and that they feel heard and understood. It is essential 
that every patient is treated with respect, nonjudgment and made to feel com-
fortable no matter how trivial or simple the issue may be. Some patients may 
present with significant distress and desperation towards their health and may 
feel the only option they have to survive is the stem cell treatment. This is un-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  10  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
healthy and unrealistic thinking. It important that these issues are given a “red 
flag of urgency” and should be addressed during the first consultation. The pa-
tient may erroneously believe that stem cells will cure the disease despite the lack 
of published evidence. In addition, patients may incorrectly think that there will 
be a rapid reduction of their symptom profile and a dramatic enhancement of 
their quality of life [14]. Reassurance and providing a realistic timeframe of im-
provement will help the patient’s quality of life and give back their independence 
[15]. Advice should be given by the clinician that the patient should be focusing 
on structured phases of improvement rather than the negative attitudes of dying.  
In patients with chronic pain caused by a significant traumatic event then 
there is the likelihood of a PTSD co-morbidity. Significantly, the PTSD event 
may involve an associated medical situation of misdiagnosis, inadequate pain re-
lief from surgery, malpractice of medical professionals, failed treatment plans, 
multiple pharmaceutical drugs that induced severe side effects such as suicidal 
ideations and the resultant constant temporal quality of “inescapable” pain. 
Moreover, breakthrough high intensity pain, and recurrent episodes can insti-
gate a crisis where the patient demands stem cells for instant pain relief. Arming 
patients with the knowledge that stem cells are a long term biological treatment 
and not reminiscent of a rapidly acting opioid drug will prevent unreasonable 
demands on the clinician.  
Past trauma, fears and the threat of death elicits extreme anxiety and stress 
that must be dealt with by psychological means – pharmaceutical drugs cannot 
treat or reduce affective pain dimensions of “fearful, punishing and cruel pains”. 
It is important that the clinical team psychologist calm the patient and ensure 
they are safe and looked after. Identification and acknowledgement of a patient’s 
emotional distress and negative thought patterns is crucial. The counselor by 
showing empathy and understanding with the patient will guide them through 
the emotional upheaval in a controlled and structured way to avoid potential self 
harm. In summary, both the physical and mental health of the patient is a prior-
ity. The patient must be in a clear, calm, positive and realistic mind frame before 
they can be eligible for the stem cell procedure. It is the role of the stem cell 
counsellor to determine and treat psychosocial issues and advise the managing 
team clinician as to when the patient is psychologically fit for the procedure.  
9. The Role of the Counselor/Psychologist in the Stem Cell   
Team 
The preferred clinical stem cell team should comprise various specialists with 
dedicated roles such as medical specialist, surgeon, stem cell scientist, nurse, 
doctor, counsellor/psychologist and additional allied health where appropriate 
such as dentist, physiotherapist and dietician. Each professional plays a large and 
important role within the team and are crucial to the stem cell procedure. It is 
advantageous of having a large and diverse team to answer all possible questions 
from the patient and family, reassure the patient that the team can deliver op-
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  11  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
timal and safe care, and provide validated methods for stem cell laboratory pro-
cedures. The counsellor has a critical role to ensure that positive attitudes and 
stable mental health are incorporated by the patient at all stages of the treatment. 
Ongoing psychological support provides security for the patient that s/he is the 
priority and the counsellor monitors and is available for the needs of the patient 
throughout the entire process. This ensures there is minimal risk of perceived 
treatment failure. The counsellor should also explain that stem cells are the be-
ginning of a long term management plan and that supervision and care of the 
patient is not a one stage treatment. This framework of multiple professionals in 
the stem cell team is designed to meet comprehensively the needs of the patient, 
and specifically for the counsellor to maintain the confidence of the patient. 
Stem cells should be viewed as an option with all other treatments. Taken to-
gether the patient will have various consultations for the different types of 
treatments possible thereby allowing the patient the liberty and confidence of the 
appropriate decision.  
A further advantage of having the stem cell counsellor is to treat patients with 
fears and phobias regarding the procedural or surgical aspects of stem cell ther-
apy. For example, needle phobias are prevalent and found in 3.5% - 10% of the 
population [16] and this type of procedure is necessary in administering the 
stem cells by the intravenous (IV) route or local administration. Reducing this 
phobia can be accomplished medically by anti-anxiety drugs, or IV sedation/general 
anesthetic. Psychological approaches include exposure therapy, cognitive beha-
vioral therapy (CBT) and solution focused therapy. 
10. Cosmetic Use of Stem Cells and Body Image Dysmorphia 
Psychological screening is particularly important for patients seeking stem cell 
therapy for cosmetic reasons. The phenomenal increase in people seeking elec-
tive cosmetic surgery and minimally invasive procedures is well documented. 
Major reasons driving this  interest is focused on an attractive appearance, 
younger looks, stamina, increased muscular attributes and enhanced body shape 
morphology [17]. The counsellor investigates to a greater depth the patient’s 
personality, lifestyle and appearance. There is a specific emphasis on identifying 
unrealistic expectations and mental health issues such as depression, eating dis-
orders and body dysmorphia.  
According  to  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders 
(DSM-V 2013) [18] the criteria and symptoms for body dysmorphic disorder is 
preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical appear-
ance that are not observable or appear slight to others. At some point during the 
course of the disorder, the individual has performed repetitive behaviors for 
example mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, reassurance seeking 
behavior and continually comparing his/herself with that of others. This preoc-
cupation can cause significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or 
other important areas of functioning. However, preoccupation in this context 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  12  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
does not concern body fat or weight.  
There may be a history of having multiple procedures such as Botox, fillers 
and face lifts as afflicted patients see flaws in themselves that no one else can see 
or simply do not exist [19]. Body image is a subjective, self-evaluation of ap-
pearance and it is a construct that includes affective, cognitive behavioral and 
perceptual  features  [20].  It  can  have  a  profound  effect  on  an  individual’s 
self-esteem, mood, eating patterns and social interactions [21] with the result of 
requesting frequent but unnecessary surgery. Despite multiple cosmetic proce-
dures the patient is unhappy, discontented and never satisfied [14]. Previous at-
tempts of cosmetic surgery fail to achieve the expected outcome and can have a 
large impact on an individual’s self-esteem and mental health, initially positive 
then in a negative manner [22]. A careful determination by the psychologist is 
needed to to advise the patient whether stem cell treatment will be beneficial or 
cause more psychological damage [23] (Figure 4). 
11. Case Studies 
Two case studies are presented to demonstrate the scope of potential psycholog-
ical effects when using stem cell therapy. Both cases have been published in the 
media - the first case in public commercial media and the second case as a peer 
reviewed medical publication.  
Case 1 - Stem cell treatment resulting in death  
Stem cell treatment at a UK teaching hospital resulted in the death of four  
 
 
Figure 4. Psychological aspects of stem cell therapy for cosmetic reasons. The map demonstrates the signs and behavioral issues of 
psychological issues such as body dysmorphic disorder. 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  13  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
children. It was reported in the public media that doctors at London’s renowned 
Children’s Hospital at Great Ormond Street were baffled when stem cell therapy 
routinely used to treat sick children with cancer inexplicably stopped working. 
The procedure was to reintroduce thawed bone marrow stem cells after chemo-
therapy [24]. Four of the children died from the procedure forcing the doctors to 
cease therapy as they were unsure what was the cause and what had gone wrong. 
The thawed stem cells underwent multiple tests for stem cell count (total num-
ber) and viability (individual cell survival). An independent expert determined 
that a crucial third test was not performed, namely the ability of the cells to pro-
liferate and replenish depleted cells. The lack of thorough testing resulted in the 
deaths of four innocent children. Media exposure cast the stem cells as a nega-
tive and dangerous treatment, but human error was the cause. 
This unfortunate event would have caused immense emotional and psycho-
logical trauma for the grieving parents and family members of the deceased 
children. The parents would have experienced a roller-coaster of emotions of 
disappointment, anger, guilt, blame, feeling distraught and sad. It would be nat-
ural for the parents and family members to feel betrayed and let down by the 
medical establishment, as they put their children in their care and trusted they 
would be safe and well looked after. Unfortunately, the outcome of planned sur-
vival resulted in unexpected death. This traumatic event could possibly destroy 
the parents trust and belief in all future medical treatments particularly stem 
therapy, in addition to the permanent loss of trust in hospitals, doctors and la-
boratory scientists.  
Case 2 - Successful stem cell therapy (patient K) 
K’s stem cell procedure has been extensively documented by the authors. K 
was a 27 yr old female with a history of right sided cluster headache and trige-
minal neuropathic pain. Multiple pharmaceutical drug treatments had been tri-
aled but were ineffective or discontinued due to side effects. Botox had been in-
jected several times into the right side of her face that initially provided pain re-
lief. Subsequent injections showed declining efficacy and then caused neurovas-
cular degeneration and significant right facial atrophy (Figure 5). K was then 
referred to the authors where she described severe pain and showed significant 
psychological distress. She described herself as being “unrecognizable”, with low 
self-esteem and a poor quality of life. Psychological assessment identified severe 
depression and anxiety which lead to attempting suicide several times. She was 
unable to work complicating her problem. 
K underwent autologous stem cell therapy that showed substantial pain re-
duction in the months that followed. Her pain intensity scores on a numerical 
rating scale (“0 = no pain, 10 = worst pain imaginable”) at baseline were 8 - 
10/10, then 5/10 at 1 month post-treatment and this further reduced to 2/10 at 4 
months post-treatment. The primary aim was a reduction in pain but there was 
clearly a noticeable cosmetic improvement in the face at 1 month and significant 
regeneration at 4 months. There were no side effects or complications with the  
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  14  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
 
Figure 5. Patient K: Stem cell therapy for neuropathic pain and facial regeneration, time-
line of her progress post stem cell treatment. Baseline pain intensity was 8 - 10/10, at 1 
mth 4/10, at 4 mths 0 - 2/10, 18 mths 0 - 1/10; excellent regeneration of the hemi-facial 
atrophy [Vickers ER. Neuropathic orofacial pain: Diagnosis and multimodal manage-
ment. Medicine Today (Journal of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners) 
2015, 16(9), 16-24]. 
 
stem cell injections. Kmade a quick recovery and was able to go back to work 
and her everyday life with very minimal down time. Five years after the stem cell 
therapy K remains free of neuropathic pain and her facial appearance is normal. 
She regained her independence and continues to work with an improved mental 
health and quality of life. 
12. Conclusions 
For the patient seeking stem cell therapy, there are potential pre-existing psy-
chological problems that must be addressed such as depression, anxiety, stress, 
unrealistic expectations, body image issues, loss of quality of life, fears and pho-
bias. Unresolved issues can result in the patient being ineligible for a stem cell 
procedure. It is imperative that a counsellor performs an in-depth assessment of 
all patients seeking stem cell therapy. Mental health issues that have not been 
diagnosed or managed will result in poor outcomes. The patient with back-
ground psychosocial conditions must work with the counsellor and complete the 
necessary psychological treatment to produce a healthy mindset with realistic 
expectations in order to be considered eligible for stem cell therapy. This is sim-
ilar to the doctor for the medical evaluation, and the scientist for validating la-
boratory protocols, as core members of the stem cell team. A dedicated and 
trained team comprising of diverse professionals who manage mental, psycho-
logical, medical, scientific and nursing issues will lead to improved patient out-
comes from stem cell therapy for the purpose of regenerative medicine. 
Regenerative medicine and the use of stem cell therapy will be major advances 
used for medical treatments of the future. It is important that these biotechno-
logical advancements result in improvements to reverse the underlying disease 
process. However, it is also imperative that the patient improves psychologically 
to have an acceptable quality of life for his/herself and a return to normal en-
gagement with the family and related social activities. From a government and 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  15  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
socio-economic perspective, regeneration of the physical “self” should subse-
quently lead to adequate psychological daily functioning and meaningful em-
ployment. This can only be achieved when the psychological state is assessed and 
treated in conjunction with the medical state when considering stem cells for 
regenerative therapy. 
Conflicts of Interest 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper. 
References 
[1]  Ankrum, J. and Karp, J.M. (2010) Mesenchymal Stem Cell Therapy: Two Steps 
Forward, One Step Back. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 16, 203-209.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2010.02.005 
[2]  Batlle, E. and Clevers, H. (2017) Cancer Stem Cells Revisited. Nature Medicine, 23, 
1124-1134. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4409 
[3]  Chen, B., Zhang, Z.K. and Wang, X. (2002) Factors Influencing Postoperative Satis-
faction of Orthognathic Surgery Patients. International Journal of Adult Orthodon-
tics and Orthognathic Surgery, 17, 217-222. 
[4]  Ryan, F.S., Barnard, M. and Cunningham, S.J. (2012) Impact of Dentofacial Defor-
mityand Motivation for Treatment: A Qualitative Study. American Journal of Or-
thodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 141, 734-742.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajodo.2011.12.026 
[5]  Rustemeyer, J., Eke, Z. and Bremerich, A. (2010) Perception of Improvement after 
Orthognathic Surgery: The Important Variables Affecting Patient Satisfaction. Oral 
and Maxillofacial Surgery, 14, 155-162. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10006-010-0212-2 
[6]  Türker, N., Varol, A. and Ogel, K. (2008) Perceptions of Preoperative Expectations 
and Postoperative Outcomes from Orthognathic Surgery: Part I: Turkish Female 
Patients. International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 37, 710-715.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijom.2008.04.014 
[7]  Malterud, K. (2001) The Art and Science of Clinical Knowledge: Evidence beyond 
Measures and Numbers. Lancet, 358, 397-400.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(01)05548-9 
[8]  Sawang, S., Oei, T.P.S. and Goh, Y.W. (2006) Are Country and Culture Values In-
terchangeable? A Case Example Using Occupational Stress and Coping. Interna-
tional Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 6, 205-219.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/1470595806066330 
[9]  Lovibond, P.F. and Lovibond, S.H. (1995) The Structure of Negative Emotional 
States: Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck 
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behavioral Research and Therapy, 33, 335-343.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-7967(94)00075-U 
[10]  Antony, M.M., Bieling, P.J., Cox, B.J., Enns, M.W. and Swinson, R.P. (1998) Psy-
chometric Properties of the 42-Item and 21-Item Versions of the Depression An-
xiety Stress Scales in Clinical Groups and a Community Sample. Psychological As-
sessment, 10, 176-181. https://doi.org/10.1037/1040-3590.10.2.176 
[11]  Raylu, N. and Oei, T.P.S. (2004) The Gambling Related Cognitions Scale (GRCS): 
Development, Confirmatory Factor Validation and Psychometric Properties. Ad-
diction, 99, 757-769. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.2004.00753.x 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  16  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE

N. Braunsteiner et al. 
 
[12]  Kamburoglu, H.O. and Ozguer, F. (2007) Postoperative Satisfaction and the Pa-
tient’s Body Image, Life Satisfaction and Self-Esteem: A Retrospective Study Com-
paring Adolescent Girls and Boys after Cosmetic Surgery. Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, 
31, 739-745. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00266-006-0133-5 
[13]  Noguti, J., De Moura, C.F.G., De Jesus, G.P.P., Da Silva, V.H.P., Hossaka, T.A., 
Oshima, C.T.F. and Ribeiro, D.A. (2012) Metastasis from Oral Cancer: An Over-
view. Cancer Genomics and Proteomics, 5, 329-335. 
[14]  Cash, T.F. and Fleming, E.C. (2002) The Impact of Body-Image Experiences: De-
velopment of the Body Image Quality of Life Inventory. International Journal of 
Eating Disorders, 31, 455-460. https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.10033 
[15]  Rankin, M., Borah, G.L., Perry, A.W. and Weyi, P.D. (1998) Quality of Life Out-
comes after Cosmetic Surgery. Plastic Reconstruct Surgery, 102, 2139-2145.  
https://doi.org/10.1097/00006534-199811000-00053  
[16]  Wright, S., Yelland, M., Heathcote, K., Ng, S.K. and Wright, G. (2009) Fear of 
Needles, Nature and Prevalence in General Practice. Australian Family Physician, 
38, 172-176. 
[17]  Sperry, S., Thompson, J.K., Sarwer, D.B. and Cash, T.F. (2009) Cosmetic Surgery 
Reality TV Viewership: Relations with Cosmetic Surgery Attitudes, Body Image, 
and Disordered Eating. Annals of Plastic Surgery, 62, 7-11.  
https://doi.org/10.1097/SAP.0b013e31817e2cb8 
[18]  American Psychiatric Association (2013) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders. 5th Edition, APA, Washington, DC.  
[19]  Garner, D.M. (2004) Eating Disorder Inventory-3 Professional Manual. Psycholog-
ical Assessment Resources, Odessa, FL. 
[20]  Nair, B.P. and Baboo, G. (2017) Effect of Cosmetic Surgery on Body Image and 
Body Image Specific Quality of Life. Journal of the Indian Academy of Applied 
Psychology, 43, 157-161. 
[21]  Burke, N.L., Schaefer, L.M. and Thompson, J.K. (2012) Body Image. In: Ramachan-
dran, V.S., Eds., Encyclopedia of Human Behaviour, Academic Press, New York.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-375000-6.00066-5 
[22]  Soesta, T.V., Kvaleme, I.L., Roldb, H.E. and Skolleborg, K.C. (2009) The Effects of 
Cosmetic Surgery on Body Image, Self-Esteem, and Psychological Problems. Inter-
national Journal of Surgical Reconstruction, 62, 1238-1244.  
[23]  Botton, M.A., Pruzinsk, T., Cash, T.F. and Persing, J.A. (2003) Measuring Out-
comes in Plastic Surgery: Body Image and Quality of Life in Abdominoplasty Pa-
tients. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 112, 619-625.  
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.PRS.0000070972.57000.08 
[24]  Roberts, M. (2014) Stem Cell Transplant Death What Went Wrong. Health Editor, 
BBC News Online. http://www.bbc.com/news/health-30194504  
 
 
 
DOI: 10.4236/ojrm.2018.71001  17  Open Journal of Regenerative Medicine 
 

NEW PAGE