www.nature.com/npjregenmed
ARTICLE OPEN
Biomineralization-inspired mineralized hydrogel promotes the
repair and regeneration of dentin/bone hard tissue
BoWen1,2,3,4,YuguoDai1,2,3, XueHan1,2,3,FangjunHuo1,2, LiXie1,2,Mei Yu1,2, Yuru Wang1,2,3, Ning An1,2,3, Zhonghan Li1,5 and
✉
Weihua Guo 1,2,3,6
Maxillofacial hardtissue defects causedby trauma orinfection often affectcraniofacial function. Taking thenaturalhard tissue
structure asa template, constructing an engineeredtissue repair module is animportant schemeto realizethefunctional
regenerationandrepairofmaxillofacialhardtissue.Here,inspiredbythebiomineralizationprocess,weconstructedacomposite
mineralmatrixhydrogelPAA-CMC-TDMcontainingamorphouscalciumphosphates(ACPs),polyacrylicacid(PAA),carboxymethyl
chitosan(CMC)anddentinmatrix(TDM).ThedynamicnetworkcomposedofCa2+·COO−coordinationandACPsmadethehydrogel
loadedwithTDM, and exhibited self-repairing abilityand injectability. Themechanical properties of PAA-CMC-TDMcan be
regulated,butthefunctionalactivityofTDMremainsunaffected.Cytologicalstudiesandanimalmodelsofhardtissuedefectsshow
thatthehydrogelcanpromotetheodontogenesisorosteogenicdifferentiationofmesenchymalstemcells,adapttoirregularhard
tissuedefects, and promote insituregeneration ofdefective tooth andbone tissues. Insummary, this papershowsthat the
injectableTDMhydrogelbasedonbiomimeticmineralizationtheorycaninducehardtissueformationandpromotedentin/bone
1234567890():,; rnepgjeRneegreantieorna.tive Medicine           (2023) 8:11 ;https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-023-00286-3
INTRODUCTION materials is insufﬁcient. Traditional autologous or allogeneic,
Biological hard tissues, such as teeth, vertebrate bones, and heterogeneous bone materials exhibit high bioactivity and bone
mollusk shells, are organic–inorganic composite functional mate- inducibility. While their sources, ethical issues, immunogenicity,
rials with excellent mechanical properties; thus, they play andother potential risks cannotbe underestimated11.
important physiological roles in an organism while constantly Thedentinmatrix,which containscollagenproteinsandmany
renewing and repairing themselves1,2. Meanwhile, owing to non-collagen proteins (NCPs) associated with mineralization, is a
factors such as infection, trauma, tumor-caused large areas of typeofautologousacquisitionbiomineralmaterial12–15.Itplaysa
bone defects and insufﬁcient blood supply, normal self-repair is signiﬁcant role in the osteogenesis and odontogenic lineage
difﬁcult, especially in the case of maxillofacial hard tissue3,4. differentiationofmesenchymalcellsandcanbeusedforrepairing
Maxillofacialtissueengineeringbasedonstructuralandfunctional hard tissue defects16–19. Based on tissue regeneration and repair
reconstruction is beneﬁcial to the physiological repair of requirements,clinicalbioremediationmaterialsareexpectedtobe
maxillofacialtrauma.Bysimulatingthebiologicaltissuestructure, nontoxic and nonirritating and exhibit stable properties, good
a personalized tissue engineering repair module has been biocompatibility, sustainable efﬁcacy, and low technical sensitiv-
constructed to realize the functional repair and regeneration of ity20–22. However, due to the highly mineralized structure and
the defect area, such as the repair of the mandibular defect, particleconditionsofthetreateddentinmatrix(TDM),itisdifﬁcult
construction of bioengineered teeth, and regeneration of the tobereconstructedrapidlyafterthedestructionofcovalentbond
pulp–dentin complex5,6. Ideally, for areas with insufﬁcient blood scaffolds, and its functional activity in vivo is unstable in the
supplyorcomplexdefects,anosteoinductivescaffoldcanbebuilt absenceofadhesive carriers23.
using functional ﬁlling materials by preventing the ﬁlling of the Unlike the structure formed by covalent bonds, the dynamic
deadspace,mediatingtheimmuneactivityandstem-cellhoming bonding properties of noncovalent bonds, including ion interac-
anddifferentiation,andpromotingtheregenerationofrestorative tions, hydrophobic interaction, metal coordination bonds, and
bone or dentin structure to achieve functional preservation or hydrogenbonds,canimpartself-healingandinjectableproperties
restoration7. to the materials24. In teeth, bones, and other biominerals, NCPs
The biomaterials commonly used for hard tissue repair and and proteoglycan, as binders of mineralized collagen and
regenerationaredividedintofourmaincategories:biogenicbone stabilizers of the amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) precursor,
or bone derivative, bio-ceramic-based materials, synthetic or formthebasisfortheuniquemechanicalpropertiesofhardtissue
natural polymer materials; and double or multiple composite with resistant elastic binding25–27. Inspired by these structural
biological bone repair materials8–10. However, the physiological features,thebuildingofhardtissuerepairmaterialswithsuitable
repairofboneordentinrestorationusingsimplecalciummineral mechanical properties and efﬁcient healing properties has been
1StateKeyLaboratoryofOralDisease&NationalClinicalResearchCenterforOralDiseases,WestChinaHospitalofStomatology,SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China.2National
EngineeringLaboratoryforOralRegenerativeMedicine,WestChinaHospitalofStomatology,SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China.3DepartmentofPediatricDentistry,WestChina
HospitalofStomatology,SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China.4StomatologicalHospital,SchoolofStomatology,SouthernMedicalUniversity,Guangzhou,China.5Centerof
GrowthMetabolismandAging,KeyLaboratoryofBio-ResourceandEco-EnvironmentofMinistryofEducation,CollegeofLifeSciences,SichuanUniversity,Chengdu,China.
6YunnanKeyLaboratoryofStomatology,TheAfﬁliatedHospitalofStomatology,SchoolofStomatology,KunmingMedicalUniversity,Kunming,China.
✉
email:guoweihua943019@163.com
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
2
recently explored by mimicking the mineral phases of natural the mineralized hydrogel exhibited an interconnected micropor-
biological bone in terms of its chemical composition and ousstructurerangingfrom100to1000nm.However,thesurface
structural features28–31. and cross-section of PAA-CMC-TDM were rough, and TDM
However, natural or recombinant NCPs are expensive and particleswithdentinetubuleswerevisiblyexposed,accompanied
clinically less practical. Several studies have used polymers to by an irregular protrusion. However, the pore structure was not
mimic NCP analogs to construct composites that bind inorganic evident. According to the STEM-EDX results presented in
mineralsandorganicpolymers32–34.Forexample,polyacrylicacid SupplementaryFig.3,Ca2+waswidelyanduniformlydistributed
(PAA)isahighlyhydrophilicsyntheticpolymerwitharichcarboxyl in the hydrogels. Among them, the concentration of Ca in PAA-
group that can be transformed into a hydrogel through cross- CMC-ACP was 89%, which is higher than those in PAA-CMC-nHA
linking.Rigidhybridmaterialssimilartomineralplasticswithhigh (65%) and PAA-CMC-TDM (78%). In addition, the content of P in
plasticity and self-healing ability can be prepared by combining PAA-CMC-nHAwas35%,whichishigherthanthoseinPAA-CMC-
PAA with Ca2+ and Mg2+28,35,36. The assembly of nano- TDM(22%) andPAA-CMC-ACP (11%).
hydroxyapatite (nHA), sodium carbonate, and PAA through ThePAA-CMC-TDMhydrogelsdescribedwereinjectedthrougha
supramolecular assembly constructs biomineralized hydrogels 1-mm needle without clogging (Fig. 2g). To evaluate their self-
withosteoinductive potential30. healingability,thehydrogelswerestainedwithblueandreddyes.
Chitosanisanaturalcationicpolysaccharidepolymerextracted Theywerecutintotwopieceseachandthenreassembledtoform
from a chitosan shell. A soluble carboxylated chitosan (CMC) is completely integrated gels at room temperature. Moreover, it can
obtained from the carboxylation reaction. Chitosan and its beseenfrom theSEMresults thatthefusion can beobserved on
derivatives are widely used in hydrogels, healing trauma-class thecross-sectionafterthematerialsareincontactwitheachother
biomaterials, and tissue-engineered matrix materials because of (Fig.2gandSupplementaryFig.4).Afterbeingsubjectedto15min
their excellent polyelectrolyte action, biodegradability, biological ofultrasonicshock,theTDMmaterialdisintegratedrapidlyinwater.
activity, and chemical functional ﬂexibility37–39. Based on the In contrast, the formed PAA-CMC-TDM disintegrated only slightly,
principle of biomimetic mineralization, PAA and CMC are often maintaining a stable shape of the material (Fig. 2f). In addition,
reacted to form copolymers or used to prepare hybrid hydro- compared to TDM powder, PAA-CMC-TDM exhibited signiﬁcantly
1234567890():,; xmCyMiaAnCpse,aratasilnthiezdoa(wtCHionaAn2)+,4i0,nb–t4ah2Fsi.seigds.tuo1dnyfsrcouompnrsatmrtuhocetlescpPueAlarAsrp-CesMectlfCi‐va-eTsDseoMmf,bwblyihoemorefimTPeDAtMAic, Sirmetqapubrioirlevitemydeonpftlasmsotiifncidetyirfafaelinrzedendctoahupylpddlirbcoaegtireoelnshsacpeendardioifsfe(Freign.tl2yet)o. meetthe
acts as the mineralization core template. The Ca2+·COO− PAA-CMC-TDMhydrogelhasgoodmaneuverability,butitsstability
coordination bond in PAA-CMC-TDM stabilizes TDM and forms a may be affected by the external environment. It is therefore
dynamic noncovalent bond scaffold with hydrogen and ionic necessary to optimize the mechanical properties of hydrogels by
bonds simultaneously, which imparts the hydrogel-suitable self- adjustingtheircontentandmolecularweight,stabilityandswelling
healingandshear-thinningproperties.ThehydrophilicityofPAA- coefﬁcient, and degradation ability. As shown in Fig. 3a, b, when
CMC-TDM is conducive to the release of its functional active CMC was added, the hydrogel’s ﬂuidity and plasticity decreased
components in the physiological environment, thus inducing the and its molecular weight increased. In addition, PAA-CMC was
odontogenicandosteogenicdifferentiationofmesenchymalstem formedstablyandwouldnotcollapseduetogravity.Theresultsof
cells,andultimatelypromotingtheinsituregenerationofvarious theSEManalysisrevealedthattheCMCchangeshardlyaffectedthe
defectsinhard tissues, such asbone andteeth. microstructure; only the number of pores was reduced, and
irregular nodules were formed. With the other conditions
maintained the same, through the addition of mineral matrices
RESULTS suchasTDMandnHA,thecolorofthehydrogelchangedtomilky
Preparation ofmineralized hydrogel white and theﬂuiditydecreased. However, thehydrogel could be
To improve the formability of TDM powder and expand its appropriately formed, and the stability was improved. Moreover,
applicationrange,wedesignedaTDMcarrierwithPAAastheNCP theﬁllerexposureratesonthegelsurfaceincreasedwiththesizeof
simulantandCMC astheglycosaminoglycan simulant,promoted themineralmatrix,asobservedinFig.3c,d.
the polymerization of saturated Ca2+, and constructed a plastic Figure3e,fshowsthattheincreaseinthemolecularweightand
andinjectablenoncovalentmineralhydrogel(Fig.1).Asshownin volume of the added CMC reduced the material’s swelling rate,
Fig. 2a–c, mineralized particles, such as TDM or nHA, were whichinturndecreaseditswatercontent.Therewasnoapparent
uniformlydispersedintheCMC/Na HPO solutionandmixedwith effectofTDMornHAontheswellingcoefﬁcientofthegelwhen
2 4
the PAA solution through dripping. The PAA-CMC (Fig. 2a), PAA- other parameters were known. Mineral particles can reduce the
CMC-TDM(Fig.2b),andPAA-CMC-nHA(Fig.2c)hydrogelsformed watercontentofthehydrogeltosomeextent,andTDMisslightly
weremilkywhite,insolubleinwater,andhydrophilic.Thisstrategy more effective than nHA at reducing the water content. The
degradationexperimentofPAA-CMC-TDMlastedfor12days(Fig.
does not require a complex molecular design or sophisticated
synthesis process30. Furthermore, under 500μL of PAA solution 3g, h). As the soaking time was increased, PAA-CMC series
hydrogelsexhibitedvaryingdegreesofdegradation.Inparticular,
and 0.1g of TDM, the mass and volume of the hydrogels can be
CMCwithhighmolecularweightandcontentcouldenhancethe
stabilized by adjusting the pH value, the concentration of CaCl
2 hydrogel stability and prolong the degradation time. Mineral
and Na HPO , and the molecular weight and content of CMC
2 4 matrix additions such as TDM/nHA also improve the hydrogel
withinacertainrange(SupplementaryFig.2).Basedonthesedata
stability, but the type and quality of the mineral matrix has little
and considering that the material needs to be used in the
effect ondegradation.
physiological environment, we determined that the system must
be prepared with the material having a pH of 7.0, less than or
equal to 15W molecular weight of CMC, Na HPO concentration Physicochemical characterization ofmineralized hydrogel
2 4
of0.25mol/L(5mL), and CaCl concentration of1mol/L (2mL). Todeterminethethermalpropertiesofthemineralizedhydrogels,
2
The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results showed that the thermogravimetric-difference thermogravimetry analysis (TG-
the PAA-CMC surface was complete, but holes of different sizes DTG)analysiswasperformed.Figure4ashowstheTGAcurvesof
were visible at the cross-section, suggesting a connected PAA-ACP, PAA-CMC-ACP, PAA-CMC-nHA, and PAA-CMC-TDM
micropore structure inside (Fig. 2d). Zhao et al.30 suggested that under airﬂow. As the temperature increased, water loss, PAA
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
3
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of PAA-CMC-TDM mineralized hydrogel for hard tissue regeneration and the experimental design. The
mineralizedparticlessuchasTDMornHAareuniformlydispersedintheCMC/Na HPO solutionandmixedwiththePAAsolutionbydripping.
2 4
After the components are fully mixed, saturated calcium chloride is added to promote the formation of the hydrogel. The ability of bone
regenerationwasevaluatedbycytologicalexperimentsinvitro,repairexperimentsofthefemurandcalvarialdefectsinratsanddentalpulp
defectmodelexperimentsinBeagledogs.
degradation,andCMCdegradationoccurredsequentiallyinthese beenreportedthatnonmineralcomponentsindentinaccountfor
four gels. According to the TGA curves, for PAA-ACP, the weight approximately20% ofthetotal mass45.
ratios of calcium phosphate, PAA, and water were 20, 60, and Furthermore,thecrystalstructuresofthemineralizedhydrogel
20wt%, respectively, which is in line with previously obtained characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy are pre-
results36. In addition, compared to PAA-ACP, the quality of CMC- sented in Fig. 4b. As shown in Fig. 4b, the XRD patterns of PAA-
containinghydrogelsdecreasedsigniﬁcantlyat600°C.Inrelevant ACP and PAA-CMC-ACP were mound-like, indicating the amor-
studies43,44, the water loss temperature of CMC was found to be phous characteristics of the hydrogels. The XRD proﬁles of the
approximately80°C.Thedecompositiontemperatureofthemain mineralized hydrogels supplemented with TDM and nHA were
chain fracture was approximately 260°C, which released small largelysimilartothatoftheaddedmineralmatrix.Thediffraction
molecular fragments; and the decomposition temperature was peaksof nHA and TDMat 2θ were25.7°, 28.6°, 31.5°, 34.2°, 40.1°,
approximately630°C. 47.1°, 49.8°, and 53.2°, which are consistent with the values
AccordingtothemassofthelastremainingresiduesinTGA,the speciﬁedin theXRDstandard card ofHA(JCPDS: 72–1243)46.
contents of PAA-CMC-TDM and PAA-CMC-nHA were more than Meanwhile, the FTIR spectrum was drawn to identify the
40%, most of which were expected to be HA with a degradation chemicalstructureoftheresultantgels(Fig.4c).InPAA-CMC,the
temperature above 1000°C. Under the same preparation condi- 3400cm−1 wide peak corresponded to the υOH and the N-H
tions and the same mass of TDM and nHA, the PAA-CMC-TDM stretchingvibration(υNH)derivedfromtheCMC.Incontrasttothe
residuewaslowerthanthePAA-CMC-nHAresidue,whichmaybe PAAatlas,thepeaksofυC=O(carboxylicacidcarbonylstretching
duetothecollagenandfunctionalproteinspresentinTDM.Ithas vibration) in PAA-ACP and PAA-CMC decreased from 1690 to
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
4
Fig.2 Preparationandmorphologicalcharacterizationofmaterials.a–cPreparationprocessandhydrophilicevaluationofthePAA-CMC,
PAA-CMC-nHAandPAA-CMC-TDM.Thehydrogelsshowedfavorablehydrophiliawitharelativelylowwatercontactangle.dTheSEMsurface
andsectionobservationoffreeze-driedhydrogels.eTDMandPAA-CMC-TDMpowderweremixedwithwaterandmolded,respectively,PAA-
CMC-TDMpowdercouldbeformedsmoothlyanditsshapewasrelativelycomplete.fImagesofPAA-CMC-TDMhydrogelandTDMclumps
sonicated for 0–15min. g Self-healing process of PAA-CMC-TDM. The hydrogels were cut into two pieces and then reassembled at room
temperaturetoformacompletelynewone.Hydrogelcanbeextrudedthroughasyringe.Scalebar(d):10and100µm.
1540cm−1. Meanwhile, in PAA-CMC, the peak at 1550cm−1 elements present in PAA-CMC were mainly derived from calcium
correspondedtotheN-Hin-planebendingvibrations(δNH),while phosphate,whilethoseinPAA-CMC-TDMandPAA-CMC-nHAwere
that at 1320cm−1 corresponded to the C-N stretching vibrations mainly derived from the HA component. In PAA-CMC and PAA-
(υCN), both of which were the main characteristic peaks of the CMC-nHA, the binding energies of C 1s peaks at 284.8, 286, and
amidegroups.InPAA-ACPandPAA-CMC, thepeakat1030cm−1 288eVwereassignedtoC=O,C-O,andC-CfromPAAandCMCin
was assigned to the stretching vibration of PO43- (υPO). In the hydrogels, while some binding energy of C 1s in PAA-CMC-TDM
infrared spectra of PAA-CMC-TDM and PAA-CMC-nHA, the peaks
might have resulted from the collagen and NCPs in the dentin
at 600 and 565cm−1 corresponded to the in-plane bending
matrix.
vibrationabsorption of O-P-O(δO-P-O).
Inaddition,weusedX-rayphotoelectronspectrometer(XPS)to
reveal the chemical composition and status of the mineralized Rheological characterization ofmineralized hydrogel
hydrogels (Fig. 4d). The results revealed that these hydrogels The rheological and viscoelastic properties of the mineralized
contained Na, O, N, Ca, C, Cl, and P elements. The Ca and P hydrogelwereinvestigatedthroughrheologicalstudies.Here,the
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
5
Fig.3 Studyoftheproperties,swelling,anddegradationofhydrogelsafteradjustingthematerialcomposition.aTheopticalimagesand
SEM surface observation of hydrogels of identical content CMC with different molecular weights. b The optical images and SEM surface
observation of hydrogels of identical molecular weights CMC with different content. c The optical images and SEM surface observation of
hydrogelsof TDMwith different content. d The optical images and SEM surface observation of hydrogels of nHAwith differentcontent.e I.
Swelling rate of hydrogels containing different molecular weights and contents of CMC at the same amount of TDM. II. Swelling rate of the
hydrogelscontainingdifferentamountsofTDMornHAwiththesameamountofCMC.fI.Thewatercontentofhydrogelscontainingdifferent
molecularweightsandcontentsofCMCatthesameamountofTDM.II.ThewatercontentofthehydrogelscontainingdifferentamountsofTDM
ornHAwiththesameamountofCMC.gResidualweightofhydrogelscontainingdifferentmolecularweightsandcontentsofCMCinPBSwith
2U/mL collagenase at 37°C for 12 days. h Residual weight of hydrogels containing different amounts of TDM or nHA in PBS with 2U/mL
collagenaseat37°Cfor12days.Errorbarsindicatestandarddeviation(n=3);*p<0.05,**p<0.01,and***p<0.001(two-wayANOVA).Scalebar
(a–d):SEM,10µm.
elasticityandﬂuidity indicatorsofthematerialswereanalyzedin thematerial (nHA >0.1g, TDM >0.2g), themechanical properties
terms of the storage modulus (G’) and loss modulus (G”)47. ofthewholehydrogelwillgraduallyimprove(SupplementaryFig.
According to the oscillatory rheological characterization, the 5a, b). In addition, the value of G’ increases with the molecular
molecular weight and content of CMC and the mineral matrix weight of CMC, which indicates an increase in the material
ﬁllers (TDM and nHA) affected the mechanical properties of the hardness.WiththeincreaseintheamountofCMCwiththesame
hydrogels (Supplementary Fig. 5). The addition of a few mineral molecular weight, both G’ and G” increased at ﬁrst and then
particlescandecreasetheG’andG”valuesofthegeltoacertain decreased (Supplementary Fig. 5c–f). Considering that the ﬁlling
extent.However,withtheincreasingnumberofparticlesaddedto material for irregular hard tissue defects needs to balance the
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
6
Fig.4 Componentsandstructurecharacterizationofhydrogels.aTheTGA-DTGanalysiscurveofhydrogelsPAA-ACP,PAA-CMC,PAA-CMC-
nHAandPAA-CMC-TDMwithtemperaturerangesfrom50to800°C.bTheXRDpatternsofthehydrogelsandthemineralmatrixﬁllersTDM
and nHA. c ATR-FTIR spectra of PAA-ACP, PAA-CMC-ACP, PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM, CMC and PAA. d XPS spectrum and the high-
resolutionXPSspectraofCa2p,C1sandP1softhefabricatedPAA-CMC,PAA-CMC-nHAandPAA-CMC-TDM.
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
7
Fig. 5 Rheological characterization of the mineralized hydrogel. a Rheological strain sweeps of the hydrogel (strain = 0.01–100%,
temperature:20°C,andfrequency:10Hz).bRheologicalfrequencysweepsofthehydrogel(temperature:20°Candstress:10Pa,0.1–50Hz).
cStep–strainsweepsofthehydrogel(temperature:20°Candfrequency:10Hz,strain:0.1%,200s,100%,200s).
mobility and stability of the gel, hydrogels containing CMC indicating that the swollen hydrogels behaved like a viscous
(20,000MW, 4mL, 5%), TDM (0.5g)/nNA (0.5g), and 35% PAA materiallacking elasticcharacteristics49.
(1mL)werecompared and referenced for further study. Next,step–strainmeasurementsforstrainsrangingfrom0.1to
Based on the appellate components, we prepared PAA-CMC, 100% were performed to evaluate the repeated self-healing
PAA-CMC-nHA and PAA-CMC-TDM and assessed the changes in property of the hydrogels, following hydrogel rupture by a
their mechanical properties after 24 and 48h of immersion in mechanical shearing force (Fig. 5c)29,50. With a small-amplitude
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Stress sweeps (10Hz) were ﬁrst oscillatory shear (strain = 0.1%) applied to all three hydrogels,
performedtoobtainthehydrogels’linearviscoelasticrange(LVR), their G’ values increased slightly beyond their G” values. Then,
asshowninFig.5a.TheLVRofthehydrogelswithTDM/nHAwas underalarge-amplitudeoscillatoryshearlastingfor200s(strain=
slightlywiderthanthatofPAA-CMCbeforeimmersion, whilethe 100%), the G” values of all hydrogels increased beyond the G’
LVR of PAA-CMC widened after 24h of immersion in PBS. After values, indicating ﬂuid-like behavior and failure of the hydrogels;
48hofPBSimmersion,nosigniﬁcantdifferenceswereobservedin however,thevaluesimmediatelyreturnedtotheoriginalsolid-like
theLVRofthe threehydrogels. behavior after the shear was reduced. This property was also
Then,frequencysweeptestswereconductedwithintheLVRof maintained in several repeatable cycles and remained largely
the hydrogels. As shown in Fig. 5b, with an increase in the unaffectedby theaddition ofmineral particles.
vibration frequency, the G’ and G” values of the three types of
hydrogelsincreased.Attheinitialstage,thevalueofG”washigher Invitroeffects on cellbiological behavior ofmineralized
thanthatofG’,andthehydrogelsbehavedlikeviscousmaterials. hydrogel
When the frequency reached a certain value, the G’ value Dentalpulpmesenchymalstemcells(DPCs)withhighproliferation
increased beyond the G” value. Research has shown that potential and multi-lineage differentiation ability can be obtained
hydrogelsbehaveasviscoelasticmaterials47,48.Afterbeingsoaked from the pulp tissue of young permanent teeth and deciduous
in PBS, their G’ and G” values decreased. A higher vibration teeth, which exhibit osteogenic, chondrogenic, adipogenic, and
frequencywasrequiredwhentheG’valueexceededtheG”value, neurogenicpotential51.RelatedstudieshaveshownthatDPCscan
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
8
beusedastheseedcellfortoothandbonetissueengineeringand In addition, ﬂuorescent immunohistological staining of the
mightbesuitableforevaluatingtheosteogenesisandodontogen- macrophage marker CD68 and M2 macrophage marker CD163
esis induction abilities of the materials52,53. We obtained spindle- wasusedtocharacterizethelocalimmuneresponse(Fig.7c,d)54.
shaped DPCs that maintained their morphology after passage CD68+ and CD163+ macrophage invasion at the interface
three, and these cells expressed a mesenchymal marker Vimentin betweenPAA-CMC-TDMandthesurroundingtissuewasobserved
(Supplementary Fig. 6a). Transwell assay and scratch experiment on day 7. However, the CD68 and CD163 expression levels
were performed to explore the ability of DPCs to migrate both decreased after 14 days, which indicated that the subcutaneous
verticallyandhorizontally(SupplementaryFig.6b–e). tissue had a mild and early inﬂammatory reaction with the
According to the statistical results obtained for the three mineralized hydrogels, with concomitant tissue healing and
independentexperimentsshowninSupplementaryFig.6d,e,the regeneration.
extracts of PAA-CMC-nHA showed an inhibitory effect on cell
migration compared to the control group, while the conditional Invivo bone tissue regenerative properties ofmineralized
mediaofCMCdidnotcontributetocellmigration.Thepromoting hydrogel
effectoftheextractsofPAA-CMC-TDMandTDMonthecellswas Thecranialboneandfemurdefectmodelswereusedtoevaluate
not signiﬁcantly different from that of the control group. The the effects of PAA-CMC-TDM and TDM on bone defect repair. As
resultsoftheproliferationofhumandentalpulpstemcell(hDPC) shown in Fig. 8a–c, in the femoral defect of the 6th week,
analysis with Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) are presented in comparedtotheblankcontrolgroup,evidentbonematrix ﬁlling
Supplementary Fig. 6f. In addition, PAA-CMC-nHA exhibited a couldbeobservedinthebonedefectareaoftheTDMandPAA-
slightinhibitoryeffectoncellproliferation.Incontrast,theextracts CMC-TDM groups. Through BV/TV and trabecular number (Tb.N)
of PAA-CMC-TDM and TDM had no evident effect on cell analyses, the amount of new bone regeneration and bone
proliferation. trabeculae in the TDM group were slightly higher than those in
Then, we evaluated the ability of the hydrogels to promote the PAA-CMC-TDM group. The numbers of new bone trabeculae
dental osteogenic differentiation through osteogenic induction andboneformationintheTDMandPAA-CMC-TDMgroupswere
culture and alizarin red S (ARS) staining (Fig. 6a). The results higherthanthoseinthecontrolgroup.Accordingtothecalvarial
showedthat,comparedtothecontrolgroupandCMCgroup,ARS defectresultsshowninFig.9a–c,therewasonlyalittlenewbone
staining in PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM, and TDM groups was formation in the control group, while the calvarial defect was
deeper. And there were evident calcium nodules that could be signiﬁcantly reduced in the TDM and PAA-CMC-TDM groups.
observedinPAA-CMC-TDMandTDMgroups.Meanwhile,through Furthermore, thebone formation and Tb.Nin the PAA-CMC-TDM
RT-PCR and western blot analyses, we detected the changes in groupwereslightly higherthanthosein theTDMgroup.
related indexes of hard tissue differentiation at protein and RNA Tofurtherobservethegrowthandrepairofboneatthebone
levelsafter7and14daysofinductionforthecells.Asdetailedin defect,westainedthedemineralizedbonetissuesectionswith
Fig.6b,comparedtothecontrolgroup,withPAA-CMC-nHA,PAA- H&E and Massion staining. As observed in Figs. 8d–i and 9d–o,
CMC-TDM, and TDM induction for 14 days, the RNA expression after 6 weeks, there was no evident inﬂammatory reaction in
levelsofosteopontin(OPN),dentinmatrixprotein-1(DMP-1),and the histological sections of each group, and the tissue cells
dentinsialophosphoprotein(DSPP)weresigniﬁcantlyenhancedin grew normally. In the femur and calvarial defect models,
compared to the control group, signiﬁcant bone healing
hDPCs. The changes in COL-I in the mineralized hydrogels and
occurred in PAA-CMC-TDM and TDM groups after 6 weeks of
TDM were not evident (p>0.05) during the 14-day induction. In
implantation. In the femoral defect, many coarse new bone
contrast, for the 7-day induction, the PAA-CMC-TDM extract
trabeculaewerefoundinthedefectareaoftheTDMgroupafter
upregulatedtheRUNX-2(p<0.05)expressionofhDPCscompared
6 weeks, while the collagen ﬁber tissue and few residual TDM
to the control group. Meanwhile, the extract of the mineralized
hydrogels PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM, and TDM signiﬁcantly particlescould beseeninthe lateralpart of thedefect inPAA-
CMC-TDM in addition to the bone trabeculae and bone-like
decreasedthealkalinephosphatase (ALP)geneexpressionunder
matrix (Fig. 8h, i). In the blank group, blood clots and repaired
7-dayinduction.Incontrast,CMCinducedamildupregulationof
trabecularstructureswere observedinthedefectarea(Fig.8d,
ALP and COL-I expression levels under 14-day induction. The
g). In the calvarial defect, after 6 weeks, there was an evident
resultsofthewesternblotanalysispresentedinFig.6c–frevealed
formationofnewboneandosteoidmatrixinthedefectareaof
that, under 7-day induction, TDM and PAA-CMC-TDM improved the PAA-CMC-TDM group, and the defect healed (Fig. 9j–l). In
theexpressionlevelsofDMP-1,DSPP,andOPNproteinscompared
the TDM group, the osteoid matrix and new bone tissue were
to thecontrol group. At the same time, compared to thecontrol
also found in the periphery and center of the defect, and the
group, the expression of RUNX-2 in the other four groups bonedefectwaspartiallyhealed(Fig.9m–o).Thebonedefectin
decreased after being induced for 7 and 14 days, especially in
the blank control group was still evident, and only a small
PAA-CMC-nHA.Inaddition,theCOL-Iexpressionincreasedslightly
amount of new bone matrix could be observed at the edge at
after 7 days of TDM and CMC induction. However, under 14-day 6 weeks (Fig. 9k, n).
induction,differenceswerenotapparentacrossgroupsexceptfor To evaluate the biosafety of the materials in the bone repair
thedecreased expressionin thePAA-CMC-nHAgroup. process, the heart, liver and kidney of the defect rats in the
experimental group were observed histologically, and no sig-
Invivo biocompatibility ofmineralized hydrogels niﬁcant abnormalities were found in them compared to the
PAA-CMC-TDM was implanted subcutaneously in the rats to healthySprague Dawley(SD) rats (Supplementary Fig.8).
directly evaluate its degradation and inﬂammatory reaction. As
shown in Fig. 7a, b, under H&E staining, after 7 days, the Pulpcapping material ofmineralizedhydrogel in the dog
hyperplasiaofﬁbrousconnectivetissuearoundthesubcutaneous model
specimenwrappedtheremainingmaterial,andundispersedTDM ForevaluatingtheabilityofPAA-CMC-TDMtopromotereparative
particles were visible in the material area, while the scaffold dentin formation and explore its possibility for vital pulp
componentsofPAAandCMCremainedinvisible.After14daysof preservation, we compared the hard tissue induction abilities of
implantation, large TDM particles could still be observed in the TDM, PAA-CMC-TDM and i Root BP plus using the Beagle dog
implantation area. Most of the small mineral particles were dentalpulpdefectmodelof8weeks(SupplementaryFig.7).The
wrappedinﬁbrousconnectivetissueanddecomposedgradually. micro-CT results (Fig. 10a) showed that the mineralized dentin
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
9
Fig.6 EffectofhydrogelonodontogenicdifferentiationofDPCs.aAlizarinRedSstainingofDPCsculturedinthecontrolgroup(PBS),TDM,
CMCandhydrogelgroups.Redindicatesmineralcontent.bRT-PCRofodontogenicdifferentiationmarkergenesDSPP,DMP-1,ALP,COL-I,
OPN, and RUNX-2 after treatment with TDM, CMC and mineralized hydrogels for 7 days and 14 days. c, d Western blot analyses of
odontogenicdifferentiationmarkerDSPP,DMP-1,ALP,COL-I,OPN,andRUNX-2aftertreatmentwithTDM,CMCandmineralizedhydrogelsfor
7days(c)and14days(d).eGray-scaleanalysisofwesternblotanalysisresultsfor7days.fGray-scaleanalysisofwesternblotanalysisresults
for14days.Errorbarsindicatestandarddeviation(n=3);*p<0.05,**p<0.01,and***p<0.001(two-wayANOVA).Scalebar(a-I):1mm;(a-II):
500µm.
layerwasformedintheeightteethintheiRootBPplusgroup(8/ signiﬁcant difference between the two groups (Fig. 10b). Mean-
8),whiledentinbridgeformationwasobservedinﬁveteethinthe while, the three groups showed no signiﬁcant difference in the
PAA-CMC-TDMgroup(5/8)andﬁveteethintheTDMgroup(5/8). mineralization degreeofthedentin bridge(Fig. 10c, d).
Through the quantitative analysis of the thickness and miner- The results of the histological analysis showed that the pulp
alization degree(BV/TV and bone mineraldensity) of the formed tissue of the experimental teeth with the dentin bridge was
dentinbridge,thethicknessandvolumeofthemineralizedtissue normal and there was no evident inﬂammatory reaction
intheiRootBPplusgroupwereslightlylargerthanthoseinthe (Fig. 10e–g). The structure of dentin-like tubules could be
TDM and PAA-CMC-TDM groups; however, there was no observed in the reparative dentin of the TDM, PAA-CMC-TDM,
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
10
Fig. 7 HE staining and ﬂuorescent immunohistological staining ofPAA-CMC-TDM implanted subcutaneously in rats.a, b H&E staining
histologic sections of skin tissues surrounding PAA-CMC-TDM for 7 days(a) and 14 days (b). c, d Fluorescent immunohistological staining
histologicsectionsofCD68(Green)andCD163(Red)ofskintissuessurroundingPAA-CMC-TDMfor7days(c)and14days(d).*Thematerial.
#Thesurroundingtissue.Scalebar(a):1mm,500µm,200µm,100µm;(c,d,CD68):100µm;(c,d,CD163):100µm;(c,d,CD68/CD163/DAPI):
100and50µm.
and the i Root BP plus groups, similar to the naturally restored particles and collapse of the capping pulp material were
third-stage dentin. In all groups, polarized high columnar observed in the PAA-CMC-TDM group.
odontoblast-like cells were observed in the dental pulp tissue
near the dentin bridge. In the i Root BP plus group (Fig. 10e),
DISCUSSION
thecompletedentinbridgewaslocatedonthepulpsideofthe
material, and there was no gap, crack or pore between the Mineralizedtissue,suchasboneanddentinhasalmostthesame
chemical composition. They are composed of 18–34% collagen,
dentine bridge and dentin tissue. Some areas of the dentine
1–2% NCPs, and 60–70% HA1. Dynamic reshaping is one of the
bridge showed bone-like dentin and the structure of dentinal
tubules was disordered. Few calciﬁed masses and hyperplastic characteristicsofthesehardtissues.Afterbeingdamaged,tooth/
bone can repair and regenerate itself through directional
blood vessels were observed in the dental pulp, but there was
migration and differentiation of stem cells, dynamic balance of
noevidentincreaseintheﬁbrousconnectivetissue.Inaddition,
osteogenesis-osteoclast and secretion and mineralization of the
the vascular content and ﬁbrous connective tissue were
hard tissue matrix. However, self-repairing of the defect tissue is
signiﬁcantly increased in the pulp tissue of the PAA-CMC-TDM difﬁcult when the scope of the defect is too large or when the
group (Fig. 10f) and TDM group (Fig. 10g). In the TDM group, materials exchanged in the defect area are limited7,55. For the
someTDMparticlesremained,andcalciﬁedspotswereformed repair and regeneration of refractory hard tissues, the tissue
in the pulp on the pulpal side, while no evident free TDM engineering technique can be used to construct composite
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
11
Fig.8 Invivoboneregenerationonfemoraldefectafter3and6weeksofimplantationofmineralizedhydrogels.aMicro-CTassessment
ofboneregenerationinfemoraldefectat3and6weeksafterimplantationand3Dmicro-CTreconstructionwascarriedouttoobservethe
bone microstructure. b The quantitative analysis of bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) ratio by micro-CT. c The quantitative analysis of
trabecularnumber(Tb.N,1/mm)bymicro-CT.d–fTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationofboneregenerationindefects
at3weeksafterimplantation.g–iTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationofboneregenerationindefectsat6weeksafter
implantation (Control group, PAA-CMC-TDM group, TDM group). Error bars indicate standard deviation (n=4); *p<0.05, **p<0.01, and
***p<0.001(two-wayANOVA).Scalebar(a):1mm;(d–i):200μm.
structures containing inducible scaffolds and hard tissue ﬁlling material can induce undifferentiated mesenchymal stem cells to
materials7,11. formboneprogenitorcellsandgenerateboneatectopicsites60,61.
Thetreatedacellularbonematrixanddentinmatrixcanserveas Dentinmatrixmaterials exhibit better treatmentcharacteristics
a growth factor repository for hard tissue repair, such as bone and easier autologous acquisition, and are less immunogenic,
morphogenetic proteins, transforming growth factor‑β, DMP-1 making them attractive graft materials62–65. However, the
and OPN1,56,57. In addition, these mineral matrix materials have granulated mineral matrix has no stable interaction force in the
porousscaffoldsthatmatchtheirphysiologicalfunctions,suchas physiologicalenvironment,soitisdifﬁculttomaintaintheshape
the osteon and dentinal tubule. Because of these, they exhibit andfunctionforalongtime,whichisnotconducivetoapplication
osteoconductionandosteoinduction,makingthemidealmaterials inanenvironmentwithirregulardefectsandcomplexstructures66.
forhardtissuerepair.Theosteoconductivematerialcanguidethe Small particles (such as less than 80μm) can form a clay mixture
growth of blood vessels and cells involved in bone regeneration byelectrostaticactionandintermolecularforceintheliquid-phase
andcanparticipateinbonerepairasathree-dimensionalstructure excipient, but the morphology is unstable. Too small mineral
for hard tissue deposition58,59. In contrast, the osteoinductive powder can easily collapse and be absorbed in the tissue defect
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
12
Fig.9 Invivoboneregenerationoncalvarialdefectafter3and6weeksofimplantationofmineralizedhydrogels.aMicro-CTassessment
ofboneregenerationincalvarialdefectat3and6weeksafterimplantation,and3Dmicro-CTreconstructionwascarriedouttoobservethe
bone microstructure. b The quantitative analysis of bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) ratio by micro-CT. c The quantitative analysis of
trabecularnumber(Tb.N,1/mm)bymicro-CT.d–iTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationofboneregenerationincalvarial
defect at 3 weeks after implantation of PAA-CMC-TDM and TDM. j–o The HE staining and Masson’s trichrome staining evaluation of bone
regeneration in calvarial defect at 6 weeks after implantation of PAA-CMC-TDM and TDM. Error bars indicate standard deviation (n=4);
*p<0.05,**p<0.01,and***p<0.001(two-wayANOVA).Scalebar(a):1mm;(d,j,g,m):1mm;(e,f,h,I,k,l,n,o):500μm.
area. However, the small particle mineral matrix is conducive to stable gel state, the molecular weight of PAA must be at least
thereleaseoforganiccomponents67–69.Chitosan,silkﬁbroinand 20,00028,30,36.However,TDMcontainsconsiderableprotein,which
sodiumalginatehavebeenusedascompositematerialsforbone mixeswiththeCO generatedduringthepreparation,resultingin
2
tissuerepairduetotheirosteoconductionproperty70–72.However, theformationofconsiderablefoam.Meanwhile,thehighPHvalue
these composites are mostly preformed, lack injectability, and of sodium carbonate may affect the active substances in TDM.
cannotbe self-repaired afterstructural damage. Thus, we selected the phosphate solution and promoted gel
To improve the formability of TDM powder and expand its polymerizationthroughCa2+addition;asaresult,ACPwasformed
applicationrange,wedesignedaTDMcarrierwithPAAastheNCP in the hydrogel36,73, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. ACP is
simulatorandCMCastheglycosaminoglycansimulant(Figs.1and involvedinthemineralizationofcollagenﬁbrils.Theexistenceof
2a–c). Sun and Lei ﬁrst constructed the PAA/ACC mineral matrix ACP can improve the structural stability of hydrogels36,74. Mean-
gelwithsodiumcarbonateandfoundthat,fortheformationofa while, the dynamic networks of Ca2+·COO− coordination bonds
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
13
Fig.10 Themineralizedhydrogelsaspulpcappingmaterial,evaluatedinvivoinBeagledogs.aMicro-CTassessmentofdentinbridgein
dogtooth at8weeksafter pulpcappingwith iRoot BPplus,PAA-CMC-TDMand TDM.bThe quantitativeanalysis of thethicknessof the
formeddentinbridge(Tb.Th)bymicro-CT.cThequantitativeanalysisofdentinbridgemineralizationratio(BV/TV)bymicro-CT.dThebone
mineraldensityanalysisofdentinbridgebymicro-CT.eTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationof8weekspulpcapping
withiRootBPplusindogtooth.fTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationof8weekspulpcappingwithPAA-CMC-TDMin
dogtooth.gTheHEstainingandMasson’strichromestainingevaluationof8weekspulpcappingwithTDMindogtooth.Ddentin,Ppulp
tissue,DBdentalbridge.Errorbarsindicatestandarddeviation(n=5);*p<0.05,**p<0.01,and***p<0.001(one-wayANOVA).Scalebar(a):
1mm;(e,f,g,HE/Left):500μm;(e,f,g,HE/Right):200μm;(e,f,g,Masson/Left):500μm;(e,f,g,Masson/Right):200μm.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
14
and ionic bonds were involved in the hydrogel’s noncovalent accessories38. Therefore, PAA-CMC-TDM materials can be used as
bond crosslinking and its self-healing and shear-thinning proper- bioactive materials for osteogenicinduction.
ties36,75. This can be proved by the FTIR spectrum (Fig. 4c). The The PAA-CMC-nHA group considerably affected the cell
change in the peaks of υC=O in PAA-ACP and PAA-CMC, proliferation and migration to a considerable extent, although
contrasting with the PAA atlas, indicates that carboxylate is therewasnostatisticaldifferencebetweenthegroups,according
chelatedwithCa2+inbothhydrogels30.ThevalueofδNHinPAA- to the results of the CCK-8 and transwell/scratch experiments.
CMC shifted the offset compared to CMC, suggesting a charge Fromtheperspectiveofcomposition,theextractofPAA-CMC-nHA
effect betweentheamino inCMC andcarboxyl inPAA42. contains PAA, CMC, nHA and rich calcium and phosphorus ions.
In clinical practice, appropriate maneuverability and low The extract of PAA-CMC-TDM contained a large number of
swelling ratio are more conducive to tissue repair and regenera- cytokines and NCPs from the natural extracellular matrix16,92. In
tion76. By strengthening hydrogen bonds or constructing a PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA combines with the calcium of apatite to
double-meshhydrogelwithmulti-sacriﬁcialbonds,theoperability improvethestabilityofPAA-CMC,butthereisnobuffermedium
ofthematerialcanbemaintainedandthemechanicalproperties for the release of free calcium and phosphorus ions. With the
of the material can be improved77,78. Hydrogels based on swellinganddegradationofthematerials,theconcentrationofCa
hydrogen and ionic bonds can be easily affected by pH, and P in the liquid environment increased. In some studies,
temperature, and humidity, as well as the molecular weight and extracellular Ca2+ have been found to promote the odontogenic
crosslinking degree of polymer materials. It is possible to adjust and osteogenic differentiation of DPCs93,94. In addition, low
the hydrogel composition such that its swelling rate, water concentrations of extracellular Ca2+ promote cell proliferation. In
content, and degradation time, as well as its plasticity and contrast,otherstudieshaveindicatedthatadditionalCa2+induce
hardness, are affected79,80. As CMC and PAA are mixed, they apoptosis of hDPCs16,92,95,96. However, the drastic change of ion
concentrationinextracellularenvironmentmayaffectthenormal
intertwine to form polymers based on electric charges, which
increases the material’s hardness, promotes swelling reduction, physiologicalactivitiesofcellsandeventuallyleadtoadecreasein
cell activity97. In contrast, in PAA-CMC-TDM, DMP-1, OPN and
andprolongsdegradation(Fig.3).Therheologicalcharacterization
other NCPs in TDM materials can chelate calcium ions, stabilize
ofmineralizedhydrogel(SupplementaryFig.5)alsosuggeststhat
withtheincreaseinCMCmolecularweight,thevalueofG’showed ACP, and enter the partially decalciﬁed collagen structure to
promote collagen remineralization, or directly participate in the
a certain upward trend, indicating that the material hardness
increased. Tang et al.80 found that the improvement in the mineralization of the extracellular matrix of cell differentiation,
thus stabilizing the ion concentration in the environment31.
crosslinkingdegreeandmolecularweightofacrylicacidandCMC
Meanwhile,thenHAcanbedirectlyabsorbedbycellsafterpartial
canaffectthemechanicalpropertiesofthematerial.Theseresults
dissolution and can signiﬁcantly promote osteogenic differentia-
are in line with those obtained by related studies of hydrogels
tion of cells98. However, it may also cause drastic changes in the
based on CMC and PAA81,82. As an amphoteric polymer material,
ion concentration in the surrounding liquid environment, which
the content and molecular weight of CMC can affect the ionic
may inﬂuence the vitality of cells99. At the same time, the
bondandhydrogenbondinteractionwithPAA,whichmaybeone
apoptosis and increase in ROS induced by nanoparticles may
of the main factors affecting the swelling and rheological
affectcellactivity100,101.
properties of the material83. Mineral substrates, such as TDM
AlizarinredstainingofPAA-CMC-NHA,PAA-CMC-TDM,andTDM
andnHA,canalsoincreasethevolumeandhardnessofhydrogels
showed obvious color change, suggesting that these materials
whileimproving their stability.
may have suitable mineralization-inducing ability (Fig. 6a). In
Theswellingofmaterialsinaliquidenvironmentcanaffecttheir
additiontothecalciumnodulesobservedinTDMandPAA-CMC-
mechanicalproperties84.Therheologicalfrequencysweepsofthe
TDM, the obvious staining might have been caused by mineral
hydrogels (Fig. 5) showed that, in the liquid environment, the particles entering the cell-membrane sheets96. On this basis, we
linear viscoelastic interval of the hydrogels was shortened, the
furtherdiscussedthechangeintherelatedindexesofhardtissue
elasticity was gradually reduced, and the gels were swollen and
differentiationattheproteinandRNAlevelsafter7and14daysof
liqueﬁed. The three types of hydrogels continued to show the cell induction (Fig. 6b–f). There is evidence that TDM and its
rheological characteristics of gel materials after swelling for 48h;
extracts affect dental pulp cell differentiation through Wnt/
thatis,withintheviscoelasticrange,theyshowedviscosityatlow β-catenin signaling102. The RNA expression levels of OPN, DMP-
vibrationfrequencyandelasticityathighvibrationfrequency30,48. 1,andDSPPinhDPCsweresigniﬁcantlyincreasedafter14daysof
After prolonging the soaking time of PBS-collagenase, the
induction (PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM, and TDM) when com-
hydrogels degraded gradually. The degradation mode of the pared to the control group. DSPP, DMP-1, OPN, and bone
PAA-CMC material swelled and dissolved in the early stage, and sialoproteinaremembersoftheSIBLINGfamily,whichparticipate
the HA component could chelate with the carboxyl group to in the formation, maturation, and mineralization of dentinogen-
stabilize the gel structure. However, in the later stage, with the esis103,104. DMP-1 is an important protein involved in biominer-
over-hydrationofthegel,PAA-CMC-TDMeventuallydisintegrated alization. The N and C terminals of its protein structure impart
andTDM particles werereleasedinto theenvironment30. polyelectrolyte properties, which allows it to stabilize ACP by
Afteraninjury,stemcellsplayacriticalroleintissuerepairand bindingcalciumionsandguidingcollagenﬁbers105.DSPPcanbe
self-renewal, and they function through paracrine, migration and further transformed into DSP and DPP proteins, which regulates
differentiation85,86. DPCs are derived from nerve spines and are the formation of dentinal tubules106. OPN is a phosphorylated
mainly found in the dental pulp tissue, which are essential for proteinthathasahighafﬁnityforcalciumandparticipatesinthe
dental pulp tissue repair and regeneration87,88. In addition to biological regulation of bone and dental mineralization. The
odontoblastdifferentiation,DPCsarealsocapableofdividinginto polyaspartic acid residues and phosphorylated groups in OPN
chondrocytes and osteoblasts. Scaffold materials combined with proteins may also contribute to the mineralization of collagen
DPCs can promote bone repair in critical areas such as the structuresbyformingandstabilizingACP107,108.Theupregulation
mandible and skull89,90. Thus, DPCs can be used to evaluate the of RUNX-2 expression was evident in the PAA-CMC-TDM group
osteogenic effect of PAA-CMC-TDM. TDM demonstrates good under7-dayinduction.Inosteogenesis,RUNX-2isoneofthemost
biological activity and biocompatibility and can promote the importanttranscriptionfactorsthatactivateosteoblastdifferentia-
differentiationofmesenchymalstemcellstowardodontogenesis/ tion marker genes. As osteoblasts are differentiated, the expres-
osteoblast16,91. The use of CMC materials in tissue engineering sion of RUNX-2 increases in preosteoblasts, peaks in immature
spans a wide range, including bone defects and wound osteoblasts,anddecreasesinmatureosteoblasts109.Bybindingto
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
15
cis-acting elements in the promoter region, RUNX-2 can regulate ability of TDM to repair hard tissue, we aim to develop multi-
some osteoblast-speciﬁc phenotypic marker expression levels purposerepairmaterials.ToevaluatetheabilityofPAA-CMC-TDM
(such as OPN and OCN)110,111. In addition, the ALP expression and TDM materials to repair hard tissue defects, a skull defect
decreases in the groups that receive mineral materials inducers model, femur defect model and dental pulp defect model were
(PAA-CMC-nHA,PAA-CMC-TDM,andTDM).Theexpressionactivity selected.
of ALP is an obvious characteristic of osteoblast differentiation. Zhaoetal.30constructedmineralizedCHAp-PAAhydrogelswith
Throughthe hydrolysis of inorganicpyrophosphate, ALP releases sodiumcarbonate,nHAandPAA,andprovedthatthesehydrogels
inorganicphosphate(Pi),providingthenecessaryphosphoricacid havegoodbonerepairabilityinrabbitfemoraldefects.However,
toformHA.However,highextracellularPicontentcaninhibitALP inthisresearch,afterCMCaddition,thePAA-CMC-nHAgroupdid
activity through a negative feedback mechanism. This is not achieve better results than TDM in vitro. Based on previous
consistent with our results, considering the high phosphate cytological experiments, we compared the repair of hard tissue
content in the hydrogels prepared from mineral materials112,113. defects among PAA-CMC-TDM, TDM, and blank treatments in
Chitosan-basedmaterialscanpromotetheregenerationofﬁbrous animalexperiments.Inthefemoraldefect(Fig.8),thedefectarea
connective tissue and, thus, are often used in dressings to oftheTDMgroupwashealedafter6weeks,whilesomeparticles
promotewoundhealing114.Inourstudyaswell,CMCexhibiteda remained in the PAA-CMC-TDM group. PAA-CMC-TDM showed
promotingeffect on COL-I. almostcompletehealingofthedefectareainskulldefects,while
After the implantation of exogenous bone repair materials, TDMshowedevidentnewbonetissueformation,partiallyhealing
neutrophils,macrophages,andotherimmunecellsﬁrstenterthe the defect (Fig. 9). The defect of the constructed femur was not
bone defect area. While promoting the degradation of the completely transﬁxable, which was beneﬁcial to the implant’s
scaffold, they coordinate the recruitment of regeneration-related preservation. In contrast, the functional components per unit
cells, and cooperate with the materials to promote new bone volumeinthedefectareaoftheTDMgroupweremorethanthose
formation115,116.AssumingthePAA-CMC-TDMandTDMmaterials in the PAA-CMC-TDM group, and the repair effect was more
are implanted in defects, similar phenomena are likely to occur. evident22.Thecalvarialdefectwepreparedwas5mmindiameter
For an intuitive evaluation of PAA-CMC- TDM’s inﬂammatory andexposedthepenetratingdefectoftheduramater,whichisa
response, we implanted it directly into the subcutaneous tissue. critical bone defect. In this case, PAA-CMC-TDM exhibited good
The TDM particles were wrapped by hyperplastic ﬁbrous stability and ﬁlling ability, which can ensure the stable retention
connective tissue 14 days after the material was injected, as and function of TDM functional components to achieve a better
showninFig.7a,b.Theimmunoﬂuorescenceresultsshowedthat effect ofbone repair128.
CD68+ (M1 macrophage marker) and CD163+ (M2 macrophage The preservation treatment of the dental pulp partially
marker) macrophages were inﬁltrated at the interface of the damaged by accident or infection depends on the interaction
materials and surrounding tissues on the 7th day, but the between the pulp capping material and dental pulp tissue,
macrophage reaction was not evident after 14 days, and the formingareparativedentinbridge.Thisprocessinvolvestheearly
expression levels of CD68 and CD163 were decreased117. Under inﬂammatory reaction after pulp capping, the induction of
appropriatestimulation,macrophageswereactivatedintoastate homing of mesenchymal stem cells, and the differentiation of
of inﬂammation and can be roughly divided into two types: M1 dentin129. As a type of widely used commercial pulp capping
(classical activation) and M2 (alternative activation). M1-type material,iRootBPplusisanimprovedcalciumsilicate(CSC)-based
macrophages exhibit pro-inﬂammatory effects associated with material, with the main components of calcium silicate, zirconia,
immune responses to both bacterial and intracellular pathogens. tantalum oxide, and calcium sulfate130. As a strong alkaline vital
Incontrast,M2-typemacrophagesexhibitmoreanti-inﬂammatory pulp preservation material, i Root BP plus solidiﬁes in water and
effects and have related functions in angiogenesis and wound releases OH−, Ca2+, Si4+, and other components to achieve
healing118,119. By polarizing macrophage M1/M2 to reduce antibacterial, stem-cell differentiation and dentin bridge forma-
absorption, biological tooth root composites developed from tion131,132.ComparedtoCH,CSCexhibitsbetterbioactivity,forms
TDM can improve the retention rate and stability after implanta- intactanddensedentinbridges,andachievesexcellentefﬁcacyin
tion120,121. These results indicate that PAA-CMC-TDM, as a long-termclinicalobservations133–135.Inthisstudy,iRootBPplus
substitute for tissue repair, showed low immunogenicity and wasintroducedasapositivecontroltoevaluatetheabilityofPAA-
suitablebiocompatibility. CCMC TDM to promote restorative dentin formation through the
Dentin and bone tissue have similar chemical compositions Beagle dog pulp defect model. Based on the histological and
(collagen ﬁbers and HA) and are developed from the mesench- imaging methods, TDM and its derivatives promoted the
ymal cells of mesoderm. As bones develop, they are formed by formation of restorative dentin. Moreover, the scaffold (PAA-
two osteogenic mechanisms: intramembranous ossiﬁcation and CMC-TDM) prevented the root canal calciﬁcation caused by TDM
endochondral ossiﬁcation. Dentin is developed by spherical particles. Holielet al.17 achieved thevital pulptherapy ofhuman
mineralization after the formation of collagen ﬁbers56,122,123. third molars after pulp penetration by using TDM derived from
According to the morphological structure, bone can also be autologous teeth. Furthermore, they compared the therapeutic
classiﬁed into long bone, ﬂat bone and irregular bone22. The effects of direct pulp capping of TDM, Biodentine and MTA in
femurisalongboneandhasaclassicalbonestructure,including patients with accidental traumatic pulp exposures. According to
trabecula,bonemarrowcavity,andcorticalbone.Itsbloodsupply theCBCTresults,therewerenosigniﬁcantdifferencesamongthe
mainly originates from the peripheral blood vessels and the three groups136. According to some histological studies, the
internal bone marrow cavity. The skull is a ﬂat bone, which is mineralizeddentinbridgeoftheCSCmaterialisdifferentfromthe
similar to other maxillofacial bone structures, with vascular dentine bridge. The biological process is more likely to be
structureinsideandrichtrabeculaeonthesurface,butnodeﬁnite considereda reparativeprocess than aregeneration response137.
bonemarrowcavitystructure124,125.Unlikebone,teetharedirectly Meanwhile,themildormoderateinﬂammationinducedbyCSCto
exposed to the oral environment, and their internal vascular stimulatetheregenerativeprocessisconcerning.Stronglyalkaline
network only interacts with the outside through the root canal materials are beneﬁcial to control infection, but can also lead to
oriﬁce;thus,theirabilitytoself-repairislimited4,126.Theexistence complications such as root canal hypercalciﬁcation and root
ofvitalpulpformsthebasisformaintainingthebiologicalactivity resorption138.
of the pulp–dentin complex and is vital for the preservation and Insummary,basedonbiomimeticmineralization,weusedPAA-
continuousdevelopmentofyoungpermanentteethwhoseapical and CMC-chelated Ca2+ to assemble supramolecules indepen-
foramen is not completely closed127. Leveraging the origin and dentlytoconstructabioactivemineralgelPAA-CMC-TDMwiththe
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
16
dentin matrix as the mineralization core template. Based on Preparation ofTDMmaterials andmineralized hydrogels
noncovalent bond networks, such as ionic, hydrogen, and metal We prepared the TDM material through human-and pig-derived
coordination bonds, PAA-CMC-TDM was found to be moldable, isolated teeth based on previously proposed methods16,18. After
injectable, and self-healing, and exhibited suitable initial stability the periodontium, the dental crown, dental pulp, and predentin
inthephysiologicalenvironment.ThesynthesizedPAA-CMC-TDM wereremoved;theteeth’sresidualtissuewasdemineralizedusing
couldmaintainthebioactivityofTDMandinduceosteogenicand EDTAgradients(17%,10%,and5%),andcleanedandfreeze-dried
odontogenic differentiation of DPCs. Furthermore, the results of to obtain TDM. TDM was repeatedly milled and screened with a
animal experiments showed that our developed PAA-CMC-TDM frozen grinding machine until the diameter of the obtained
can promote in situ dentin/bone regeneration in complex defect powderdid not exceed40μm.
areas, which can be used as a potential scheme for clinical bone Thehydrogelwaspreparedatroomtemperature.First,aqueous
repair. solutions of CaCl (0.1mol/L, 5mL) and PAA (35wt%, 1mL) were
2
mixed to form a transparent precursor solution, named “solution
A”.Next,accordingtotheexperimentaldesign,acertainamount
METHODS
of CMC was dissolved in the aqueous solution of Na HPO
2 4
Materials (0.2mol/L, 10mL) to obtain a uniform white suspension supple-
HA (~97%, <100nm particle size), sodium carbonate (Na CO , mented with TDM or nHA, named “solution B”. Under vigorous
2 3
~99.5%), sodium phosphate dibasic dihydrate (Na HPO ·2H O, stirring, “solution B” was added dropwise to “solution A” until a
2 4 2
~98%), calcium chloride (CaCl ~96%), calcium hydroxide uniform white suspension was formed. After stirring the suspen-
2,
(Ca(OH) , ~95%), and sodium hydroxide solution (NaOH, sionat600rpmfor24h,CaCl (1mol/L)wasaddedtothesolution,
2 2
1.000mol/L) were purchased from Aladdin. Carboxymethyl and the hydrogel gradually clustered around the Teﬂon-coated
chitosan (CMC, Mw≈20,000, 60,000, 100,000, and 150,000) was stirrer.Thehydrogelwasthenwashedthreetimeswithdeionized
purchased from BoMei Biotechnology (Hefei, China). Ethanol, water and sterilized with ethylene oxide after 8–12h of
potassiumchloride(KCl),hydrochloricacid(HCl,36.0–38.0%),and lyophilization. After the same amount of hydrogel was freeze-
sodium chloride (NaCl) were purchased from Kelong (Chengdu, dried, the sample’s contact angle was measured using a
China). PAA (Mw≈250,000, 35wt%), 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole MobileDrop contact angle meter (Kruss, Hamburg, Germany) to
(DAPI), β-sodium phosphate glycerol, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, determinethesurface hydrophilicity.
alizarin red, vitamin C, ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) To observe the material’s stability in liquid, we took the TDM
and dimethyl sulfoxide were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. powder lump as the control group and PAA-CMC-TDM as the
Sodium pentobarbital, sterile syringe ﬁlter (33mm diameter, experimental group, both of which were placed in PBS and
0.22µmporesizehydrophilicpolyethersulfonemembrane)were ultrasonically shaken for 5, 10, and 15min to observe the
obtained from Merck Millipore (Germany). Paraformaldehyde, material’s shape. Then, PAA-CMC-TDM was dyed blue and red
Tween-20,TritonX-100,PBS,Collagenase-IandHematoxylin-Eosin with pigments, respectively, and reassembled and left at room
were obtained from Biosharp (Guangzhou, China). In addition, i temperature for 30min to observe the self-healing of the
Root BP Plus was obtained from Innovative Bioceramix (Canada). hydrogel. The 0, 10 and 30min of recombinant hydrogels were
The α-minimal essential medium (α-MEM), fetal bovine serum respectivelytaken,lyophilizedandthenSEMwasusedtoobserve
(FBS), and penicillin/streptomycin solution were purchased from thehealingofthesection.
Hyclone(USA).Transwellchamberswith8-μm-porepolycarbonate
membranes were purchased from Corning (New York, NY, USA).
Swellingproperties andrelativewater content
CCK-8,BCAProteinAssayKit,andTotalProteinExtractionKitwere
Totesttherelativewatercontentandswellingratio,thehydrogels
obtained from KeyGen Biotech (Nanjing, China). Cell/Tissue Total
were equilibrated in PBS for 24h at 37°C. After cleaning, the
RNA Isolation Kit (Lot#RC112-01), cDNA Synthesis Kit (Lot#R312-
hydrogel was freeze-dried for 12h to determine the water
01),andSYBRqPCRMasterMix(Lot#Q712-02)wereobtainedfrom
Vazyme (Nanjing, China). Masson’s Trichrome Stain Kit and the content. The determination of the swelling degree of hydrogels
requiredthematerial to beincubated inPBS for48h.
Hematoxylin-Eosin/HE Staining Kit were obtained from Solarbio
Theequilibrium water content wascalculated asfollows:
(Beijing, China). The PAGE Gel Fast Preparation Kit (10%,
Equilibrium water content (%)=(W –W )/W ×100% (W
Lot#PG112) was obtained from Epizyme (Shanghai, China). The w d w w
and W indicate the weights of wet and dry hydrogels,
antibodies used in this experiment are listed in Supplementary d
respectively)
Table2.TheClarityWesternECLSubstrateKitwaspurchasedfrom
Theswellingratio ofthehydrogels was quantiﬁed asfollows:
Bio-Red (USA).
Swelling ratio (%)=(W /W )×100% (W indicates the
s 48h d s 48h
swollenweightfor48hinPBS and indicatesdry weight)
Ethicsapproval statement To obtain more accurate results, these experiments were
The experimental protocol for the animal experiments and the performedintriplicate.
acquisition of related human biological samples have been
approved by the Research Ethics Committee of West China
Degradation ofPAA-CMC hydrogels
HospitalofStomatology(TheWestChinaHospitalofStomatology
The degradation of the PAA-CMC hydrogels was conducted for
Institutional Review Board, WCHSIRB-D-2021-414, WCHSIRB-CT-
12days.Thesehydrogelswereincubatedat37°CinPBSwith2U/
2021-362).
mL collagenase and replaced every 3 days. The hydrogels were
The hDPCs and the dentin matrix were derived from healthy
lyophilized,and theweightwasdeterminedas follows:
third molars extracted for clinical reasons at West China Hospital
Residualweight(%)=(W /W )×100%(W andW indicatethe
ofStomatology.Humansamplesinthisstudywereobtainedwith t 0 0 t
hydrogelweights attimes0 and t,respectively)
informedconsentfromalldonorsandunderthesupervisionand
guidelinesoftheWestChinaHospitalofStomatologyInstitutional
ReviewBoard (WCHSIRB-CT-2021-362). Component andstructurecharacterization ofhydrogels
ThefemaleSDratsandfemalebeagledogswereobtainedfrom SEM(Inspect F, FEI,USA)was appliedto observethe surfaceand
DashuoExperimentalAnimalCenter(China).Animalswerehoused internal structure of the hydrogels. Brieﬂy, hydrogels of different
in ventilated cages on a 12:12-h light/dark cycle with ad libitum compositions were lyophilized and cut off after embrittlement in
accesstofood and water. liquid nitrogen, sprayed with gold on the surface and cross-
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
17
section, and then placed under a scanning electron microscope Chemotaxis assayofhDPCs withmineralized hydrogel
for observation. The elemental Ca and P analyses and sample We used transwell assay and scratch wound‐healing migration
mappingwereperformedusinganEDAXsuperoctane(Apreo2C, assay to evaluate the cell chemotaxis. For the transwell assay,
Thermo FisherScientiﬁc, USA). hDPCs(1×104)wereseededinto theuppercompartment ofthe
The morphology of calcium phosphate nanoparticles in PAA- chambers. The extracts of TDM, PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM,
CMC hydrogels without TDM and nHA was observed using a andCMCwerecoatedonthebottominthelowercompartment.
transmission electron microscope (Hitachi H7500, Japan). The After24h,cellsmigratingtothelowersideoftheﬁlterwereﬁxed
hydrogel was freeze-dried, ground into 40 μm powder, and with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30min, stained with crystal violet
resuspendedwithdeionizedwaterata1mg/mLratio.Themixture
for20min,andcountedunderamicroscopeinsixpredetermined
wascoatedonthecoppermeshsurfaceandlefttodryinanatural ﬁelds usingImageJ software.
state,andthemicromorphologyofthesamplewasobservedata
For the scratch wound assay, the cells were seeded in dishes
voltageof 200kV.
and a scratch was created in the cell monolayer with a 1000µL
The chemical composition and status of PAA-CMC hydrogels
pipettetip.Thescratchareawasphotographedimmediatelyafter
weredeterminedusinganXPS(ThermoFisherESCALABXi+XPS
the scratch was created and after 48h, and was measured using
System).XPSdatawere processed using theAVANTGE software. Image J software. Cell migration rate (%)=(1–scratcharea/
FTIR spectroscopy was used to characterize the materials. The
originalscratcharea)×100. All experiments were independently
rawmaterialPAA,CMC,TDM,andnHAandthepreparedPAA-ACP,
repeatedthree times.
PAA-CMC-ACP,PAA-CMC-nHA,andPAA-CMC-TDMhydrogelswere
subjected to vacuum-drying to obtain a solid powder and
characterized on a Thermo Fisher Nicolet Is5 (FTIR) within a CellproliferationabilityofhDPCswithmineralizedhydrogels
scanningrangeof 4000–400cm−1. TheeffectsofthehydrogelonhDPCproliferationwereevaluated
Thecrystaltypesofdrymineralhydrogelswereanalyzedusing using the CCK-8 (Dojindo, Japan). The hDPCs with a density of
a Bruker D8 Advance XRD (Bruker, Darmstadt, Germany). 5×103cellsperwellwereculturedin96-wellplatesandthecells
Regarding the test sample powder on the glass substrate, Cu-Kα were kept in TDM, PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM, and CMC
was used as the radiation source at 40kV voltage with an extracts.Allstepswereperformedaccordingtothemanufacturer’s
operating current of 40mA, scanning rate of 0.02°, and scanning protocol. The OD value was measured using the Multiskan Go
rangeof10–90°. spectrophotometer (Thermo FisherScientiﬁc, USA).
The TG-DTG of PAA-ACP, PAA-CMC-ACP, PAA-CMC-nHA, and
PAA-CMC-TDM was conducted using a Mettler Toledo TGA2
Alizarin redS staining
thermobalance (Columbus, USA). The test temperature ranged
The osteogenic medium comprised α-MEM, 10% FBS, 5mM
from50to800°C,theheatingratewas10°C/min,andthepurging
L-glycerophosphate(Sigma,USA),100nMdexamethasone(Sigma,
gaswasair.
USA), and 50mg/mL ascorbic acid (Sigma, USA). To prepare the
conditioned medium, the materials (TDM, PAA-CMC-nHA, and
Rheological characterization PAA-CMC-TDM) were incubated with α-MEM with a weight-to-
A rheometer (DHR-1, TA Instruments, USA) was used to evaluate volume ratio of 1g/10mL, and the conditioned medium of CMC
the rheological properties of PAA-CMC, PAA-CMC-nHA, and PAA- was 10mg/mL. The hDPCs with logarithmic growth of P3 were
CMC-TDM hydrogels with different compositions and concentra- seeded into 6-well plates at 1×105/well. Under 80% conﬂuence,
tions. All tests were conducted in the oscillatory mode, at 25°C, the culture medium was replaced with the osteogenic medium.
using a ﬂat rotor of 25mm diameter. First, we evaluated the Wheninductionwascomplete,theosteogenicmediumcellswere
rheologicalpropertiesofthehydrogelsaftertheyweresubjected stainedwith0.1%ARSsolution(Sigma)andphotographedunder
topartialcompositionchangesusingvibrationtimescanningata aphase-contrast invertedmicroscope (Nikon, Japan).
ﬁxed stress of 10.00Pa and frequency of 50.00Hz. Then, under
controlledothervariables,weadjustedthecontentofTDMornHA
Real-timequantitative polymerase chain reaction
and molecular weightand content of CMC, and measured theG’
and G” values of the different hydrogels. In addition, the The hDPCs seeded at 105 cells per well in 6-well plates were
rheometer was used to test the following three rheological culturedintheextractofTDM,PAA-CMC-nHA,PAA-CMC-TDM,and
properties of the hydrogels: (1) the hydrogels’ linear viscoelastic CMCfor7and 14days. Thetotalribonucleicacidof theinduced
region, storage modulus, and loss modulus (10Hz, 0.1–100% cellswasextractedwiththeCell/tissueTotalRNAIsolationKitand
strain),whichweredeterminedusingthestrainsweepmethod;(2) reverse-transcribed into cDNAs through the cDNA Synthesis Kit.
thehydrogelmodulus under thefrequency scanningtests (10Pa Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was
stress,0.1–50Hz);and(3)thestrain-induceddamageandhealing performed using the LightCycler PCR System (Roche) with SYBR
ofthehydrogels (10Hz, strain of100% and 0.1% for200s). qPCRMasterMix.Thecyclethreshold(Ct)wasrecordedaftereach
reactionandusedinthe2–ΔΔCtmethodtocalculatetherelevant
date with GAPDH as the loading control gene. The primer
Cellculture ofhumandental pulp stem cells
sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 1. All experiments
The hDPCs were derived from healthy third molars. The pulp
wereperformedintriplicates.
tissuewasmincedwithsterilescissorsandsubjectedtoenzymatic
digestionwith1mg/mLtype-Icollagenasefor30minandtiledon
thebottomofaculturebottle52.TheDPCswereculturedinα-MEM Western blotanalysis
supplementedwith10%FBSand1%(v/v)penicillin/streptomycin Theexperimental procedurefollowed themanufacturer’sinstruc-
solutionat37°Cin5%CO .Thevimentinexpressionwasanalyzed tions provided with the PAGE Gel Fast Preparation Kit (10%).
2
by immunoﬂuorescence staining following the manufacturer’s Brieﬂy,thehDPCsseededat105cells/wellinto6-wellplateswere
protocol. Immunostaining was performed using primary antibo- cultured in the extracts of TDM, PAA-CMC-nHA, PAA-CMC-TDM,
diesagainstvimentinandthesecondaryantibodyAlexaFluor488. andCMCfor7and14days.Thetotalproteinofcellsinallgroups
After counterstaining the nuclei with the DAPI reagent, the cells was extracted using the Total Protein Extraction Kit and resolved
were examined under a ﬂuorescence microscope (Leica Optical, on 10% polyacrylamide gels, which were blotted onto a
Germany). The hDPCs in passages 2–5 were used for the nitrocellulose membrane. After blocking with 5% skimmed milk,
experiments. themembranewasincubatedﬁrstwiththeprimaryantibodyand
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
18
thenwiththesecondaryantibody.Thechemiluminescentprotein Histological analysis andmicro-computed tomography
wasvisualizedwithanECLreagent(GE,USA).Theantibodiesused imagingevaluation
to detect the target protein mainly included COL-1, ALP, DMP-1, A micro-computed tomography scanner (Skyscan 1276, Kontich,
RUNX-2, DSPP, OPN, GAPDH (Supplementary Table 2). The Belgium)wasusedtoquantifytheboneparametersofthefemurs
thoroughly rinsed membrane was incubated with the secondary (10µm,70kV, 357uA), skulls (10μm, 70kV, 200uA), and teethof
antibodycoupledtothespecies-matchedHRP.Thebandintensity beagledogs(20μm, 100kV,200uA).
was quantiﬁed using NIH Image J software. The experiment was Then,thesamplesweredemineralizedin10%EDTAsolutionfor
repeatedthreetimesindependently.Theuncroppedscansofthe threemonths.Afterdehydrationandbeingembeddedinparafﬁn,
blots shown in the manuscript were supplied in Supplementary the demineralized samples were cut into 5-mm-thick sections.
Figs.9 and 10. Finally, they were subjected to H&E and Masson’s trichrome
stainingtodeterminetheextentofmineralizationtissueformation.
Invivo biocompatibility study ofrats
FemaleSDrats(200–250g)wereusedfortheinvivoexperiments. Statistical analysis
After injecting anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital, an incision Theresultsofatleastthreeindependentexperiments,performed
using GraphPad Prism v8.0 and Origin 2019, were obtained and
wasmadealongthemedianlineofthebackskinoftherats,and
presentedasmean±standarddeviation.Thedifferencesbetween
connective tissues were spread to create a subcutaneous pocket
two and multiple groups were compared by two-tailed Student’s
onbothsidesofthewound.Next,PAA-CMC-TDMhydrogelswere
t-test and one-way analysis of variance. A value of p<0.05 was
implantedintothesubcutaneouspockets.After7and14daysof
consideredstatistically signiﬁcant.
implantation,theratswereeuthanizedbyexcessivepentobarbital
injection. The materials’ skin tissues were collected for H&E
stainingandﬂuorescentimmunohistologicalstainingofCD68and Reporting summary
CD163.Eachgroupcomprised threerats. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
ResearchReportingSummary linkedto thisarticle.
Invivo study ofsmallanimalmodel boneregeneration
FemaleSDrats(250–350g)wereusedinthisstudy.Toexplorethe DATAAVAILABILITY
ability of the mineralized hydrogels for bone defect repair, we
Thedatasetsgeneratedduringand/oranalyzedduringthecurrentstudyareavailable
usedaratcalvarialandafemoralbonedefectmodeltoevaluate fromthecorrespondingauthoronreasonablerequest.
theosteoinductionofthecompositehydrogelsinvivo.Allanimals
wererandomlyassignedtothreeandsixweekswithbonedefect
CODEAVAILABILITY
models.
After injecting anesthesia with sodium pentobarbital, 16 rats Nocustomcodeormathematicalalgorithmwasusedinthisstudy.Experimentaldata
received a drill holedefect (Ø 2.5mm, depth 3mm) with a high- statisticsinthisstudywereperformedusingGraphPadPrismv8.0andOrigin2019,
andobtainedandpresentedasmean±standarddeviation.Thedifferencesbetween
speed dental handpiece and a small ball drill (Ø 1mm) under
twoandmultiplegroupswerecomparedbytwo-tailedStudent’st-testandone-way
constant cooling with NaCl in the lateral femoral condyle of the analysisofvariance.Avalueofp<0.05wasconsideredstatisticallysigniﬁcant.
lefthindlimb,andPAA-CMC-TDM(N =4,N =4)orTDM
3week 6week
(N =4,N =4)wasﬁlledinthedefectaccordingtothe
3week 6week Received:26August2022; Accepted: 13February2023;
experimental design. The same defect was prepared in the rat’s
right femur as a control group. After the surgery, the skin was
stitchedto close thedefect.
Similar to the above procedure, after injecting anesthesia, the
surgicalareaoftheratheadwasshavedanddisinfected,andthe REFERENCES
skinwascutlongitudinallytoexposetheskull.Withadrillbit,two 1. Cusack, M. & Freer, A. Biomineralization: elemental and organic inﬂuence in
craniotomydefects(diameter5mm)wereformedontheparietal carbonatesystems.Chem.Rev.108,4433–4454(2008).
bone of the skull on both sides of the sagittal suture line. The 2. Green,D.W.,Ben-Nissan,B.,Yoon,K.S.,Milthorpe,B.&Jung,H.S.Naturaland
defects were washed with saline, PAA-CMC-TDM (N =4, synthetic coral biomineralization for human bone revitalization. Trends Bio-
N =4), or TDM (N =4, N =4) ﬁlled 3inwteheek left technol.35,43–54(2017).
6 week 3 week 6 week 3. Liu,J.,Zhang,S.S.,Zheng,S.G.,Xu,T.&Si,Y.Oralhealthstatusandoralhealth
defect,andtherightdefectwasusedasthecontrolgroup.Then, caremodelinChina.Chin.J.Dent.Res.19,207–215(2016).
thesoft tissue wasclosed with stitches. 4. Morotomi,T.,Washio,A.&Kitamura,C.Currentandfutureoptionsfordental
pulptherapy.JpnDent.Sci.Rev.55,5–11(2019).
Beagledog’spulp repairmodel in vivo 5. Roohani,I.,Yeo,G.C.,Mithieux,S.M.&Weiss,A.S.Emergingconceptsinbone
repair and the premise of soft materials. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 74, 220–229
Three female beagle dogs (15kg) were used in this study. All (2021).
experimental teeth of each dog were divided into the following 6. Shao,R.etal.Stateoftheartofbonebiomaterialsandtheirinteractionswith
three groups: PAA-CMC-TDM (left maxillary region, N =8 stem cells:current state andfuture directions. Biotechnol. J. 17, e2100074
6 week
teeth), i Root BP plus (right maxillary region, N =8 teeth), (2022).
6 week
and TDM (right mandibular region, N =8 teeth). All 7. Yu,L.&Wei,M.Biomineralizationofcollagen-basedmaterialsforhardtissue
6 week repair.Int.J.Mol.Sci.22,944(2021).
experimental subjects were anesthetized with sodium pentobar-
8. Jazayeri,H.E.etal.Acurrentoverviewofmaterialsandstrategiesforpotential
bital,whichwas injected intramuscularly. useinmaxillofacialtissueregeneration.Mater.Sci.Eng.C.Mater.Biol.Appl.70,
Using sterile saline as a coolant, a 2-mm-diameter hole was 913–929(2017).
perforated on the tongue/occlusal surface in the experimental 9. Xu, H. H. et al. Calcium phosphate cements for bone engineering and their
teethwithahigh-speeddentalhandpiece.Afterusingdirectpulp biologicalproperties.BoneRes.5,17056(2017).
cappingmaterialastheexperimentalmaterial,theperforationwas 10. Burg,K.J.,Porter,S.&Kellam,J.F.Biomaterialdevelopmentsforbonetissue
engineering.Biomaterials21,2347–2359(2000).
sealedwithglassionomercement(Fuji,Japan).Thesampleswere
11. Ho-Shui-Ling, A. et al. Bone regeneration strategies: engineered scaffolds,
collected after 6 weeks and ﬁxed with 4% neutral-buffered
bioactivemoleculesandstemcellscurrentstageandfutureperspectives.Bio-
formalinfor 1week. materials180,143–162(2018).
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
19
12. Yang,B.etal.Toothrootregenerationusingdentalfolliclecellsheetsincom- 41. Qin, J., Zhong, Z. & Ma, J. Biomimetic synthesis of hybrid hydroxyapatite
binationwithadentinmatrix-basedscaffold.Biomaterials33,2449–2461(2012). nanoparticlesusingnanogeltemplateforcontrolledreleaseofbovineserum
13. Farges,J.C.etal.Dentalpulpdefenceandrepairmechanismsindentalcaries. albumin.Mater.Sci.Eng.C.Mater.Biol.Appl.62,377–383(2016).
MediatorsInﬂamm.2015,230251(2015). 42. Tanimoto, S., Nishii, I. & Kanaoka, S. Biomineralization-inspired fabrication of
14. Feng, S., Li, R. & Wang, Z. Experimental study on the biocompatibility and chitosan/calciumcarbonatescore-shelltypecompositemicroparticlesasadrug
osteogenesisinductionabilityofPLLA/DDMscaffolds.Odontology110,508–522 carrier.Int.J.Biol.Macromol.129,659–664(2019).
(2022). 43. Lozano-Navarro,J.I.etal.Chitosan-starchﬁlmswithnaturalextracts:physical,
15. Bakhtiar,H.etal.Potentialoftreateddentinmatrixxenograftfordentin-pulp chemical,morphologicalandthermalproperties.Materials(Basel,Switz.)11,120
tissueengineering.J.Endod.46,57–64.e1(2020). (2018).
16. Chen,J.etal.Treateddentinmatrixpasteasanovelpulpcappingagentfor 44. Jana, S., Trivedi, M. K., Tallapragada, R. M., Branton, A. & Mishra, R. K. Char-
dentinregeneration.J.TissueEng.Regen.Med.11,3428–3436(2017). acterizationofphysicochemicalandthermalpropertiesofchitosanandsodium
17. Holiel,A.A.,Mahmoud,E.M.,Abdel-Fattah,W.M.&Kawana,K.Y.Histological alginateafterbioﬁeldtreatment.Pharm.Anal.Acta6(2015).
evaluation of the regenerative potential of a novel treated dentin matrix 45. Goldberg,M.,Kulkarni,A.B.,Young,M.&Boskey,A.Dentin:structure,compo-
hydrogelindirectpulpcapping.Clin.Oral.Investig.25,2101–2112(2021). sitionandmineralization.Front.Biosci.(EliteEd.)3,711–735(2011).
18. Wen,B.etal.Reparativedentinformationbydentinmatrixproteinsandsmall 46. Moradi, A., Pakizeh, M. & Ghassemi, T. A review on bovine hydroxyapatite;
extracellularvesicles.J.Endod.47,253–262(2021). extractionandcharacterization.Biomed.Phys.Eng.Express8(2021).
19. Minamizato,T.etal.Clinicalapplicationofautogenouspartiallydemineralized 47. Rossi,S.etal.Rheologicalanalysisandmucoadhesion:a30year-oldandstill
dentinmatrixpreparedimmediatelyafterextractionforalveolarboneregen- activecombination.J.Pharm.Biomed.Anal.156,232–238(2018).
eration in implant dentistry: a pilot study. Int J. Oral. Maxillofac. Surg. 47, 48. Zhou,T.,Zhang,L.,Liu,Q.,Liu,W.&Hu,H.Rheologicalbehaviorsandphysi-
125–132(2018). cochemicalchangesofdoughsreconstitutedfrompotatostarchwithdifferent
20. Xie, C. et al. Advanced strategies of biomimetic tissue-engineered grafts for sizesandgluten.FoodRes.Int.145,110397(2021).
boneregeneration.Adv.Health.Mater.10,e2100408(2021). 49. Skopinska-Wisniewska, J., De la Flor, S. & Kozlowska, J. From supramolecular
21. Sivakumar,P.M.,Yetisgin,A.A.,Sahin,S.B.,Demir,E.&Cetinel,S.Bonetissue hydrogels to multifunctional carriers for biologically active substances. Int. J.
engineering:anionicpolysaccharidesaspromisingscaffolds.Carbohydr.Polym. Mol.Sci.22,7402(2021).
283,119142(2022). 50. Lee,C.S.etal.Inspiredbynature:faciledesignofnanoclay-organichydrogel
22. Buma, P., Schreurs, W. & Verdonschot, N. Skeletal tissue engineering-from bonesealantwithmultifunctionalpropertiesforrobustboneregeneration.Adv.
invitrostudiestolargeanimalmodels.Biomaterials25,1487–1495(2004). Funct.Mater.30,2003717(2020).
23. Tang,G.etal.Recenttrendsinthedevelopmentofboneregenerativebioma- 51. Yasui,T.etal.Isolationofdentalpulpstemcellswithhighosteogenicpotential.
terials.FrontCellDev.Biol.9,665813(2021). Inﬂamm.Regen.37,8(2017).
24. Du,X.,Zhou,J.,Shi,J.&Xu,B.Supramolecularhydrogelatorsandhydrogels: 52. Gronthos,S.,Mankani, M.,Brahim, J.,Robey,P. G.&Shi, S.Postnatal human
from soft matter to molecular biomaterials. Chem. Rev. 115, 13165–13307 dentalpulpstemcells(DPSCs)invitroandinvivo.Proc.NatlAcad.Sci.USA.97,
(2015). 13625–13630(2000).
25. Song,Q.etal.Contributionofbiomimeticcollagen-ligandinteractiontointra- 53. Botelho,J.,Cavacas,M.A.,Machado,V.&Mendes,J.J.Dentalstemcells:recent
ﬁbrillarmineralization.Sci.Adv.5,eaav9075(2019). progresses in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. Ann. Med. 49,
26. Nudelman,F.etal.Theroleofcollageninboneapatiteformationinthepre- 644–651(2017).
senceofhydroxyapatitenucleationinhibitors.Nat.Mater.9,1004–1009(2010). 54. Nikovics,K.&Favier,A.L.Macrophageidentiﬁcationinsitu.Biomedicines9,1393
27. Wang,W.&Elbanna,A.Crackpropagationinboneonthescaleofmineralized (2021).
collagenﬁbrils:roleofpolymerswithsacriﬁcialbondsandhiddenlength.Bone 55. Moreira,C.A.,Dempster,D.W.&Baron,R.AnatomyandUltrastructureofBone–
68,20–31(2014). Histogenesis,GrowthandRemodeling.In:Endotext[Internet].(SouthDartmouth
28. Lei,Z.,Wang,Q.,Sun,S.,Zhu,W.&Wu,P.Abioinspiredmineralhydrogelasa (MA):MDText.com,Inc.,2000).
self-healable, mechanically adaptable ionic skin for highly sensitive pressure 56. Dillon, S., Staines, K. A.,Millán, J.L. &Farquharson, C.How tobuildabone:
sensing.Adv.Mater.29(2017). PHOSPHO1,biomineralization,andbeyond.JBMR3,e10202(2019).
29. Shi, L. et al. Self-healing silk ﬁbroin-based hydrogel for bone regeneration: 57. Li,J.etal.ProteomicsandN-glycoproteomicsanalysisofanextracellularmatrix-
dynamicmetal-ligandself-assemblyapproach.Adv.Funct.Mater.27,1700591 based scaffold-human treated dentin matrix. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 13,
(2017). 1164–1177(2019).
30. Zhao,Y.etal.Bioinspiredmineralhydrogelsasnanocompositescaffoldsforthe 58. Cornell,C.N.&Lane,J.M.Currentunderstandingofosteoconductioninbone
promotionofosteogenicmarkerexpressionandtheinductionofboneregen- regeneration.Clin.Orthop.Relat.Res.S267–S273(1998).
erationinosteoporosis.ActaBiomater.113,614–626(2020). 59. Weber, F. E. Reconsidering osteoconduction in the era of additive manu-
31. Thrivikraman, G. et al. Rapid fabrication of vascularized and innervated cell- facturing.TissueEng.PartBRev.25,375–386(2019).
ladenbonemodelswithbiomimeticintraﬁbrillarcollagenmineralization.Nat. 60. Albrektsson,T.&Johansson,C.Osteoinduction,osteoconductionandosseoin-
Commun.10,3520(2019). tegration.Eur.SpineJ.10,S96–S101(2001).
32. Bleek,K.&Taubert,A.Newdevelopmentsinpolymer-controlled,bioinspired 61. Chauhan,A.&Bhatt,A.D.Areviewondesignofscaffoldforosteoinduction:
calcium phosphate mineralization from aqueous solution. Acta Biomater. 9, toward the uniﬁcation of independent design variables. Biomech. Model
6283–6321(2013). Mechanobiol.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10237-022-01635-9(2022).
33. Zhao,Y.&Tang,R.Improvementoforganismsbybiomimeticmineralization:a 62. Brunello,G.etal.Dentinparticulateforboneregeneration:aninvitrostudy.Int.
materialincorporationstrategyforbiologicalmodiﬁcation.ActaBiomater.120, J.Mol.Sci.23,9283(2022).
57–80(2021). 63. DelCanto-Díaz,A.etal.Useofautologoustooth-derivedgraftmaterialinthe
34. Butler, W. T. & Ritchie, H. The nature and functional signiﬁcance of dentin post-extractiondentalsocket.Pilotstudy.Med.OralPatol.OralCir.Bucal.24,
extracellularmatrixproteins.Int.J.Dev.Biol.39,169–179(1995). e53–e60(2019).
35. Sun, S., Mao, L. B., Lei, Z., Yu, S. H. & Cölfen, H. Hydrogels from amorphous 64. Minetti,E.etal.Implantssurvivalrateinregeneratedsiteswithinnovativegraft
calcium carbonate and polyacrylic acid: bio-inspired materials for “mineral biomaterials:1yearfollow-up.Materials(Basel,Switz.)14,5292(2021).
plastics”.Angew.Chem.Int.Ed.Engl.55,11765–11769(2016). 65. Grawish,M.E.etal.Demineralizeddentinmatrixfordentalandalveolarbone
36. Li, A. etal. Mineral-enhanced polyacrylic acid hydrogel as an oyster-inspired tissuesregeneration:aninnovativescopereview.TissueEng.Regen.Med.19,
organic-inorganichybridadhesive.ACSAppl.Mater.Interfaces10,10471–10479 687–701(2022).
(2018). 66. Abbass,M.etal.Hydrogelsanddentin-pulpcomplexregeneration:fromthe
37. Ways,M.,TM,Lau,W.M.&Khutoryanskiy,V.V.Chitosananditsderivativesfor benchtoptoclinicaltranslation.Polymers12,2935(2020).
applicationinmucoadhesivedrugdeliverysystems.Polymers10,267(2018). 67. Torres,P.M.,Gouveia,S.,Olhero,S.,Kaushal,A.&Ferreira,J.M.Injectabilityof
38. Tang,G.etal.Recentadvancesofchitosan-basedinjectablehydrogelsforbone calciumphosphatepastes:effectsofparticlesizeandstateofaggregationof
anddentaltissueregeneration.Front.Bioeng.Biotechnol.8,587658(2020). β-tricalciumphosphatepowders.ActaBiomater.21,204–216(2015).
39. Shariatinia,Z.Carboxymethylchitosan:propertiesandbiomedicalapplications. 68. Shuang,F.etal.Characterizationofaninjectablechitosan-demineralizedbone
Int.J.Biol.Macromol.120,1406–1419(2018). matrixhybridforhealingcritical-sizelong-bonedefectsinarabbitmodel.Eur.
40. Iwatsubo, T., Kishi, R., Miura, T., Ohzono, T. & Yamaguchi, T. Formation of Rev.Med.Pharm.Sci.18,740–752(2014).
hydroxyapatite skeletal materials from hydrogel matrices via artiﬁcial biomi- 69. Koga,T.etal.Boneregenerationusingdentinmatrixdependsonthedegreeof
neralization.J.Phys.Chem.B119,8793–8799(2015). demineralizationandparticlesize.PLoSOne11,e0147235(2016).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
20
70. Farokhi,M.etal.Silkﬁbroin/hydroxyapatitecompositesforbonetissueengi- 99. Fox, K., Tran, P. A. & Tran, N. Recent advances in research applications of
neering.Biotechnol.Adv.36,68–91(2018). nanophasehydroxyapatite.Chemphyschem13,2495–2506(2012).
71. Pighinelli,L.&Kucharska, M.Chitosan-hydroxyapatite composites. Carbohydr. 100. Jiang, H. et al. The biotoxicity of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles to the plant
Polym.93,256–262(2013). growth.J.Hazard.Mater.270,71–81(2014).
72. Sikkema, R., Keohan, B. &Zhitomirsky, I. Alginic acidpolymer-hydroxyapatite 101. Wu,D.,Ma,Y.,Cao,Y.&Zhang,T.Mitochondrialtoxicityofnanomaterials.Sci.
compositesforbonetissueengineering.Polymers13,3070(2021). TotalEnviron.702,134994(2020).
73. Li,N.etal.Biomimeticinorganic-organichybridnanoparticlesfrommagnesium- 102. Liu,S.etal.Treateddentinmatrixinducesodontogenicdifferentiationofdental
substitutedamorphouscalciumphosphateclustersandpolyacrylicacidmole- pulpstemcellsviaregulationofWnt/β-cateninsignaling.Bioact.Mater.7,85–97
cules.Bioact.Mater.6,2303–2314(2021). (2022).
74. Zhao,J.,Yu,L.,Sun,W.&Yang,X.Firstdetection,characterization,andappli- 103. Sreenath,T.etal.Dentinsialophosphoproteinknockoutmouseteethdisplay
cationofamorphouscalciumphosphateindentistry.J.Dent.Sci.7,316–323 widenedpredentinzoneanddevelopdefectivedentinmineralizationsimilarto
(2012). human dentinogenesis imperfecta type III. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 24874–24880
75. Currey,J.Sacriﬁcialbondshealbone.Nature414,699(2001). (2003).
76. Yan,X.etal.Advancesintheapplicationofsupramolecularhydrogelsforstem 104. George,A.,Ramachandran,A.,Albazzaz,M.&Ravindran,S.DMP1-akeyregulator
celldeliveryandcartilagetissueengineering.Front.Bioeng.Biotechnol.8,847 inmineralizedmatrixformation.J.Musculoskelet.Neuronal.Interact.7,308(2007).
(2020). 105. Erasmus,M.etal.Goldnanoparticlesynthesisusingthethermophilicbacterium
77. Wang, Z. et al. High-strength and injectable supramolecular hydrogel self- Thermus scotoductus SA-01 and the puriﬁcation and characterization of its
assembledbymonomericnucleosidefortooth-extractionwoundhealing.Adv. unusualgoldreducingprotein.GoldBull.47,245–253(2014).
Mater.34,e2108300(2022). 106. Ritchie, H. The functional signiﬁcance of dentin sialoprotein-phosphophoryn
78. Xu,X.,Jerca,V.V.&Hoogenboom,R.Bioinspireddoublenetworkhydrogels: anddentinsialoprotein.IntJ.Oral.Sci.10,31(2018).
fromcovalentdoublenetworkhydrogelsviahybriddoublenetworkhydrogels 107. Addison, W. N., Masica, D. L., Gray, J. J. & McKee, M. D. Phosphorylation-
tophysicaldoublenetworkhydrogels.Mater.Horiz.8,1173–1188(2021). dependent inhibition of mineralization by osteopontin ASARM peptides is
79. Medvecky,L.,Štulajterová,R.,Giretova,M.,Luptakova,L.&Sopčák,T.Injectable regulatedbyPHEXcleavage.J.BoneMiner.Res.25,695–705(2010).
enzymaticallyhardenedcalciumphosphatebiocement.J.Funct.Biomater.11, 108. Shapses,S.A.etal.Osteopontinfacilitatesboneresorption,decreasingbone
74(2020). mineralcrystallinityandcontentduringcalciumdeﬁciency.Calcif.TissueInt.73,
80. Tang, Z. et al. Mussel-inspired biocompatible polydopamine/carboxymethyl 86–92(2003).
cellulose/polyacrylicacidadhesivehydrogelswithUV-shieldingcapacity.Cellu- 109. Qin,X.,Jiang,Q.,Miyazaki,T.&Komori,T.Runx2regulatescranialsutureclosure
lose(Lond.,Engl.)28,1527–1540(2021). byinducinghedgehog,Fgf,WntandPthlhsignalingpathwaygeneexpressions
81. Rohindra,D.,Nand,A.&Khurma,J.Swellingpropertiesofchitosanhydrogels.S. insuturemesenchymalcells.Hum.Mol.Genet28,896–911(2019).
Pac.J.Nat.Appl.Sci.22,32–35(2004). 110. Vimalraj,S.,Arumugam,B.,Miranda,P.J.&Selvamurugan,N.Runx2:Structure,
82. Pistone, A. et al. Chitosan/PAMAM/hydroxyapatite engineered drug release function,andphosphorylationinosteoblastdifferentiation.Int.J.Biol.Macromol.
hydrogelswithtunablerheologicalproperties.Polymers12,754(2020). 78,202–208(2015).
83. Butler, M.F., Clark, A.H. &Adams, S.Swelling and mechanical properties of 111. Komori, T. Regulation of proliferation, differentiation and functions of osteo-
biopolymerhydrogelscontainingchitosanandbovineserumalbumin.Bioma- blastsbyRunx2.Int.J.Mol.Sci.20,1694(2019).
cromolecules7,2961–2970(2006). 112. Schlesinger,P.H.etal.Phylogenyandchemistryofbiologicalmineraltransport.
84. Jia, D. & Muthukumar, M. Theory of charged gels: swelling, elasticity, and Bone141,115621(2020).
dynamics.Gels7,49(2021). 113. Vimalraj,S.Alkalinephosphatase:structure,expressionanditsfunctioninbone
85. Vizoso,F.J.etal.Mesenchymalstemcellsinhomeostasisandsystemicdiseases: mineralization.Gene754,144855(2020).
hypothesis,evidences,andtherapeuticopportunities.Int.J.Mol.Sci.20,3738 114. Park, J. U. et al. Chitosan-based dressing materials for problematic wound
(2019). management.Adv.Exp.Med.Biol.1077,527–537(2018).
86. Dong,R.etal.MSC-derivedexosomes-basedtherapyforperipheralnerveinjury: 115. Tang,S.,Dong,Z.,Ke,X.,Luo,J.&Li,J.Advancesinbiomineralization-inspired
anoveltherapeuticstrategy.Biomed.Res.Int.2019,6458237(2019). materialsforhardtissuerepair.IntJ.Oral.Sci.13,42(2021).
87. Gronthos,S.etal.Stemcellpropertiesofhumandentalpulpstemcells.J.Dent. 116. Chen, R. et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-immune cell interaction and related
Res.81,531–535(2002). modulationsforbonetissueengineering.StemCellsInt.2022,7153584(2022).
88. Jeong,S.Y.etal.Fabricationofdentin-pulp-likeorganoidsusingdental-pulp 117. Schlundt,C.etal.Themultifacetedrolesofmacrophagesinboneregeneration:
stemcells.Cells9,642(2020). astoryofpolarization,activationandtime.ActaBiomater.133,46–57(2021).
89. Chamieh, F. et al. Accelerated craniofacial bone regeneration through dense 118. Gentek,R.,Molawi,K.&Sieweke,M.H.Tissuemacrophageidentityandself-
collagengel scaffolds seededwith dentalpulp stemcells. Sci.Rep. 6,38814 renewal.Immunol.Rev.262,56–73(2014).
(2016). 119. Zhang,B.,Su,Y.,Zhou,J.,Zheng,Y.&Zhu,D.Towardabetterregeneration
90. Fujii, Y. et al. Bone regeneration by human dental pulp stem cells using a through implant-mediated immunomodulation: harnessing the immune
helioxanthin derivative and cell-sheet technology. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 9, 24 responses.Adv.Sci.(Weinh)8,e2100446(2021).
(2018). 120. Lan,T.etal.Xenoextracellularmatrix-rosiglitazonecomplex-mediatedimmune
91. Tanoue, R. et al. Three-dimensional ultrastructural analysis of the interface evasionpromotesxenogenicbioengineeredrootregenerationbyalteringM1/
betweenanimplanteddemineraliseddentinmatrixandthesurroundingnewly M2macrophagepolarization.Biomaterials276,121066(2021).
formedbone.Sci.Rep.8,2858(2018). 121. Li,H.etal.RecruitedCD68(+)CD206(+)macrophagesorchestrategraftimmune
92. Nishida, M. et al. The inﬂuence of the antibacterial monomer 12- tolerancetopromptxenogeneic-dentinmatrix-basedtoothrootregeneration.
methacryloyloxydodecylpyridinium bromide on the proliferation, differentia- Bioact.Mater.6,1051–1072(2021).
tion and mineralization of odontoblast-like cells. Biomaterials 31, 1518–1532 122. He,L.etal.Biomineralizationofdentin.J.Struct.Biol.207,115–122(2019).
(2010). 123. Yao,S.etal.Biomineralization:frommaterialtacticstobiologicalstrategy.Adv.
93. An, S., Gao, Y., Ling, J., Wei, X. & Xiao, Y. Calcium ions promote osteogenic Mater.29(2017).
differentiationandmineralizationofhumandentalpulpcells:implicationsfor 124. Fischer,J.etal.Futureoflocalboneregeneration–proteinversusgenetherapy.
pulpcappingmaterials.J.Mater.Sci.Mater.Med.23,789–795(2012). J.Craniomaxillofac.Surg.39,54–64(2011).
94. An,S.etal.Short-termeffectsofcalciumionsontheapoptosisandonsetof 125. Blumer,M.Bonetissueandhistologicalandmoleculareventsduringdevelop-
mineralizationofhumandentalpulpcellsinvitroandinvivo.Int.J.Mol.Med. mentofthelongbones.Ann.Anat.235,151704(2021).
36,215–221(2015). 126. Siddiqui, Z. et al. Cells and material-based strategies for regenerative endo-
95. Özdal-Kurt,F.etal.Attachmentandgrowthofdentalpulpstemcellsondentin dontics.Bioact.Mater.14,234–249(2022).
inpresenceofextracalcium.Arch.Oral.Biol.68,131–141(2016). 127. Sabeti, M.,Huang,Y., Chung, Y.J. &Azarpazhooh, A.Prognosisofvital pulp
96. Jun, S. K., Lee, J. H. & Lee, H. H. The biomineralization of a bioactive glass- therapy on permanent dentition: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
incorporatedlight-curablepulpcappingmaterialusinghumandentalpulpstem randomizedcontrolledtrials.J.Endod.47,1683–1695(2021).
cells.Biomed.Res.Int.2017,2495282(2017). 128. Kimelman,N.etal.Review:gene-andstemcell-basedtherapeuticsforbone
97. Seifter, J. L. &Chang, H.Y. Extracellularacid-base balance and iontransport regenerationandrepair.TissueEng.PartA13,1135–1150(2007).
between body ﬂuid compartments. Physiology (Bethesda, Md.) 32, 367–379 129. Goldberg, M. et al. Inﬂammatory and immunological aspects of dental pulp
(2017). repair.Pharmacol.Res.58,137–147(2008).
98. Lowe, B., Hardy, J. G. & Walsh, L. J. Optimizing nanohydroxyapatite nano- 130. Prati, C. & Gandolﬁ, M. G. Calcium silicate bioactive cements: biological per-
compositesforbonetissueengineering.ACSOmega5,1–9(2020). spectivesandclinicalapplications.Dent.Mater.31,351–370(2015).
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

B.Wenetal.
21
131. Altan,H.&Tosun,G.Thesettingmechanismofmineraltrioxideaggregate.J. investigation, writing—review and editing. F.H.: formal analysis, data curation,
Istanb.Univ.Fac.Dent.50,65–72(2016). project administration. L.X.: methodology, resources, project administration. M.Y.:
132. Giraud, T. et al. Pulp capping materials modulate the balance between resources,datacuration,projectadministration.Y.W.:resources,projectadministra-
inﬂammationandregeneration.Dent.Mater.35,24–35(2019). tion.N.A.:resources,projectadministration.Z.L.:resources.W.G.:conceptualization,
133. Emara,R.,Elhennawy,K.&Schwendicke,F.Effectsofcalciumsilicatecementson supervision,projectadministration,fundingacquisition.
dentalpulpcells:asystematicreview.J.Dent.77,18–36(2018).
134. Paula, A. B. et al. Direct pulp capping: what is the most effective
therapy?–systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Evid. Based Dent. Pract. 18, COMPETINGINTERESTS
298–314(2018).
Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterests.
135. Sanz, J. L. et al. Comparative biological properties and mineralization
potentialof3endodonticmaterialsforvitalpulptherapy:theracalPT,ther-
acal LC, and biodentine on human dental pulp stem cells. J. Endod. 47, ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1896–1906(2021).
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
136. Holiel,A.A.,Mahmoud,E.M.&Abdel-Fattah,W.M.Tomographicevaluationof
availableathttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-023-00286-3.
directpulpcappingusinganovelinjectabletreateddentinmatrixhydrogel:a
2-year randomized controlled clinical trial. Clin. Oral. Investig. 25, 4621–4634
CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoWeihuaGuo.
(2021).
137. Dammaschke,T.,Nowicka,A.,Lipski,M.&Ricucci,D.Histologicalevaluationof
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
hardtissueformationafterdirectpulpcappingwithafast-settingmineraltri-
oxide aggregate (RetroMTA) in humans. Clin. Oral. Investig. 23, 4289–4299 reprints
(2019).
138. Torabinejad,M.,Parirokh,M.&Dummer,P.Mineraltrioxideaggregateandother Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
bioactive endodontic cements: an updated overview – part II: other clinical inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalafﬁliations.
applicationsandcomplications.IntEndod.J.51,284–317(2018).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
ThisworkissupportedbytheNationalNaturalScienceFoundationofChina(Grant adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
No.31971281,GrantNo.82270958);theSichuanScienceandTechnologyInnovative
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
TalentProject(GrantNo.2022JDRC0043);theResearchandDevelopProgram,West
Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
ChinaHospitalofStomatologySichuanUniversity(GrantNo.RD-03-202106);Miaozi materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
ProjectinScienceandTechnologyInnovationProgramofSichuanProvince(Grant indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
No.2022081). Thanks are given to the Home for Researchers (www.home-for- article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
researchers.com)fordrawingFig.1. regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS
B.W.: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, writing—
original draft. Y.D.: investigation, validation, methodology. X.H.: resources, ©TheAuthor(s)2023
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2023)   11 

NEW PAGE