www.nature.com/scientificreports
OPEN Macromolecular crowding 
regulates matrix composition 
and gene expression in human 
gingival fibroblast cultures
Rajesvaran Ramalingam , Guoqiao Jiang , Hannu Larjava  & Lari Häkkinen *
Standard cell cultures are performed in aqueous media with a low macromolecule concentration 
compared to tissue microenvironment. In macromolecular crowding (MMC) experiments, synthetic 
polymeric crowders are added into cell culture media to better mimic macromolecule concentrations 
found in vivo. However, their effect on cultured cells is incompletely understood and appears context-
dependent. Here we show using human gingival fibroblasts, a cell type associated with fast and 
scarless wound healing, that MMC (standard medium supplemented with Ficoll 70/400) potently 
modulates fibroblast phenotype and extracellular matrix (ECM) composition compared to standard 
culture media (nMMC) over time. MMC significantly reduced cell numbers, but increased accumulation 
of collagen I, cellular fibronectin, and tenascin C, while suppressing level of SPARC (Secreted Protein 
Acidic and Cysteine Rich). Out of the 75 wound healing and ECM related genes studied, MMC 
significantly modulated expression of 25 genes compared to nMMC condition. MMC also suppressed 
myofibroblast markers and promoted deposition of basement membrane molecules collagen IV, 
laminin 1, and expression of LAMB3 (Laminin Subunit Beta 3) gene. In cell-derived matrices produced 
by a novel decellularization protocol, the altered molecular composition of MMC matrices was 
replicated. Thus, MMC may improve cell culture models for research and provide novel approaches for 
regenerative therapy.
Extracellular matrix (ECM) niche of cells in tissues is three-dimensional (3D) and composed of various struc-
tural ECM components, such as collagen, proteoglycans, glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans, and signaling 
molecules, including growth factors and c ytokines1. Composition of the ECM niche is specific for distinct fibro-
blast subpopulations found in different  tissues2. Interactions of cells with the ECM niche provides biochemical 
and mechanical cues that are critical for determination of cell identity, state and function during development, 
homeostasis, repair and pathological  conditions1. The ECM niche in tissues is typically crowded with various 
molecules, which modulates their diffusion, conformation, and interactions with each other and  cells3,4. While 
traditional cell cultures in aqueous media have provided tremendous amount of important knowledge about 
various aspects of cell phenotype and functions and allowed us to develop tools for regenerative therapy, cells 
in these models are often kept in two-dimensional monolayer cultures in a non-crowded environment. For 
instance, mesenchymal stem cells in bone marrow are embedded in a three-dimensional ECM niche that has 
an estimated concentration of 21–80 mg/mL of macromolecules, while in standard cell culture medium their 
concentration is only about 4–16 mg/mL if serum concentration is 5–20%3,5,6. Therefore, cell culture models that 
better mimic the dimensionality and macromolecular crowding of the natural ECM niche found in vivo have 
been introduced. In particular, the inclusion of synthetic macromolecular crowders (MMCs), such as Ficoll, 
dextran, polyethylene glycol, and polyvinyl alcohol, into culture media have been proposed to compensate for 
this d eficiency7. Recent evidence from mass spectrometry-based proteomics of adult human dermal fibroblast 
ECMs from cultures generated using MMC (Ficoll 70/400) and information from public proteomics databases 
of core matrisome proteins (collagens, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans) from adult human skin support the 
idea that MMC generates matrices with in vivo-like  composition8. Furthermore, MMC has allowed generation 
of cell cultures that are composed of layers of cells embedded in their own ECM niche (three-dimensionality) in 
an accelerated  rate9. Therefore, MMC is emerging as a technology to generate cell culture conditions that may 
better mimic the ECM niche of cells in tissues than the traditional methods. Use of MMCs may not only benefit 
Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, 2199 
Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. *email: lhakkine@dentistry.ubc.ca
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047   | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 1
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
research about interactions of cells with their ECM niche, but could also provide better tissue engineering-based 
modalities for translational research and regenerative therapy. Interestingly, however, the effect of MMC on 
cultured cells appears to vary based on cell type and tissue origin, culture conditions, and MMCs u sed7. Thus, 
effect of MMC appears cell-type specific and may need to be optimized for different cellular contexts.
Fibroblasts are the key cells that generate the ECM niche in various soft connective tissues, including skin 
and oral mucosal gingiva. Unlike mostly mesoderm-derived skin fibroblasts, gingival fibroblasts originate from 
the neural crest. In addition, they associate functionally with fast regenerative-like wound healing, akin to fetal 
skin wound healing, compared to adult scar-forming skin. In addition, gingival fibroblasts display distinct gene 
expression repertoire in vivo and in vitro compared to skin  fibroblasts10–15. For instance, at protein level, cul-
tured gingival fibroblasts show differences in abundance, organization, structure, and composition of proteins 
that are important in creating a tissue-specific ECM niche compared to skin fi broblasts16,17. These include ECM 
proteins, integrins that bind the ECM proteins, growth factors that bind and modulate ECM deposition (e.g., 
TGF-β1 and VEGFA), and MMPs that remodel the ECM. In addition, cultured gingival and skin fibroblasts 
show significant differences in the expression of a number of genes for various ECM niche-associated genes, 
including ECM molecules, cell surface receptors, MMPs, and growth f actors16–18. Therefore, gingival fibroblasts 
may provide a distinct cell type that will allow us to interrogate cell-ECM niche interactions that are important 
in tissue regeneration and provide opportunities to develop novel tissue engineering modalities for regenerative 
therapy. However, whether MMC may regulate their phenotype and function is not known.
Among the molecules used for MMC, Ficoll is a neutral, highly branched, hydrophilic polysaccharide formed 
by the reaction of sucrose and epichlorohydrin, and dissolves well in aqueous solutions 19,20. Unlike other charged 
crowding agents, Ficoll does not easily bind to biological molecules allowing it to occupy space without “scav-
enging” these molecules from the solution. It is commonly synthesized in molecular weights of 70 kDa (Ficoll 
70) and 400 kDa (Ficoll 400) with hydrodynamic radii of 40 Å and 80 Å, respectively 5. Therefore, in the present 
study, we wanted to find out whether culture of human gingival fibroblasts in medium supplemented with MMCs 
(Ficoll 70/400) modulates their phenotype, composition of ECM niche, and gene expression as compared to cells 
cultured in similar medium without MMC (nMMC) over time.
Materials and methods
Isolation of primary human gingival fibroblasts.  The gingival fibroblast strain (GFBL-NLd) used in 
the study comes from a collection in our laboratory. The tissue biopsy from where the cells were cultured from 
was collected from a tissue discard obtained during a small routine dental operation of a clinically healthy tissue 
from a healthy 14-year-old female as previously  described21. The study was approved by the Clinical Research 
Ethics Board at the University of British Columbia for all procedures involving human tissues and cells (protocol 
C05-0047-C02-0076). Informed written consent was obtained from the donor and parents according to the 1975 
Declaration of Helsinki. GFBLs were routinely cultured in the standard growth media consisting of Dulbecco’s 
Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (CAT#31600-083; Gibco Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), 10% 
fetal bovine serum (FBS) (CAT#12484-028; Gibco Life Technologies), and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic (AXB) 
(CAT#15240-062; Gibco Life Technologies) at 37 °C and 5%  CO. Experiments were performed at passages 
2
4–10.
Three-dimensional (3D) culture of gingival fibroblasts.  GFBLs were cultured in the above culture 
medium until 90% confluency. Cells were then trypsinized and seeded in the standard medium at a density 
of 25 ×  103 cells per c m2 on 6-well tissue culture plates (CAT#353046; Corning, Corning, NY, USA) or gelatin 
coated glass coverslips (CAT#12-545-80; Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) placed in 24-well tissue culture 
plates (CAT#3524; Corning Costar, Kennebunk, ME, USA). After 24 h, medium was replaced with the above 
medium supplemented with 50 µg/ml ascorbic acid (Millipore Sigma: A-4034, Burlington, MA, USA) (nMMC, 
control medium) or with 50 µg/ml ascorbic acid and 37.5 mg/mL of Ficoll 70 (F2878; Millipore Sigma) and 
25 mg/mL of Ficoll 400 (F4375; Millipore Sigma) (MMC, test medium)5. Cells were cultured up to 14 days 
to generate 3D cultures where cells are embedded in their own E  CM22,23. Cultures incubated in their normal 
growth medium for 24 h were designated as day 0 samples. Samples switched to the nMMC or MMC media after 
the above 24-h period were further cultured for the indicated time before sample collection (designated as day 
3, 7, 10, and 14 cultures).
Real-time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR).  At indicated time points of culture, total RNA was extracted from the cul-
tures with Invitrogen PureLink RNA Mini Kit (CAT#12183018A; ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and assessed for quantity and purity using the GeneQuant Pro RNA/
DNA Calculator (CAT#10619; Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK). Total RNA was 
reverse transcribed with Applied Biosystems High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (CAT#4308228; 
ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was synthesized with a Master-
cycler Gradient Reverse-Transcriptase PCR Instrument (CAT#5331; Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) with the 
following program: 1 cycle at 25 °C for 10 min, 1 cycle at 37 °C for 120 min, and 1 cycle at 85 °C for 5 min to heat 
inactivate the reverse transcriptase. The primers used for RT-qPCR are listed in Supplementary Table S1. Primer 
design has been described in detail  previously24. cDNA from each sample was diluted (1.8 ng/mL) and run such 
that the Ct values were well within the range of their standard curves. Diluted cDNA (5 μL) was mixed with 
10 μL of Applied Biosystems Power SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (CAT#4367659; ThermoFisher Scientific) 
and 5 pM of primers, for a final volume of 20 μL. RT-qPCR amplification was performed on the CFX96 System 
(Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). At least 2 reference genes were used in reactions performed as a 
triplicate for each sample with non-transcribed RNA used as a negative control. Data was analyzed according to 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 2
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the comparative Ct method (CFX Manager 2.1; Bio-Rad Laboratories). Statistical comparisons were performed 
using Log2 transformed values. Results reflect three to seven biological replicates.
Generation of cell-free cell-derived matrices (CDMs).  In order to develop a novel, efficient decel-
lularization method for the 3D cultures, we tested the use of latrunculin B as an actin destabilizing agent, 
deoxycholate as a mild detergent, and DNase in sequential incubations to remove cellular elements, including 
cytoskeletal actin and β-tubulin and DNA from the  cultures25,26. To this end, GFBLs were cultured for 7 days 
in their nMMC culture medium. Cultures were then incubated at various concentrations (0.2–5 μM) and times 
(1–4 h) of latrunculin B (CAT#L-5288; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 1 × EDTA free protease inhibi-
tor (CAT#11873580001; Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA) in DMEM at 37 °C25. Cultures were washed 
twice with PBS and incubated in 0.05 M Tris–HCl (pH = 8), 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM M  gCl, 1.0 mM C  aCl, and 
2 2
0.5% sodium deoxycholate (CAT#0613; VWR, Solon, OH, USA) in ultra-pure water at 4 °C for 20  minutes26. 
Cultures were then washed once with PBS and incubated in 10 mM Tris–HCl (pH = 7), 2.5 mM  MgCl, 2.5 mM 
2
 CaCl, and 20 μg/mL DNase (CAT#3778-0100, Akron Biotech, Sarasota, FL, USA) in ultra-pure water at 37 °C 
2
for 20 min to remove  DNA26. Phase contrast microscopy, staining of DNA by DAPI, and immunostaining of 
actin and β-tubulin (see below) showed that incubation with 0.6 μM latrunculin B for 3 h followed by treatment 
with deoxycholate and DNase were effective in removing all cellular and cytoskeletal elements and DNA from 
the cultures. In all subsequent experiments, GFBLs were cultured in the test media for 3, 7, 10, and 14 days 
before decellularization using 0.6 μM latrunculin B treatment for 3 h before deoxycholate and DNase treatment 
as above to render cell-free fibroblast-derived 3D ECMs (cell-derived matrices, CDMs).
Quantification of total protein content in fibroblast cultures and cell-derived matrices.  To 
assess total protein amounts, 3-, 7-, 10- and 14-day cultures (with cells) and parallel CDMs generated in 6-well 
tissue culture plates were used. GFBL cultures and CDMs were washed with PBS and solubilized in 2% SDS 
containing 0.005% bromophenol blue and 10% glycerol in 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH = 6.8). Samples were collected 
by using a rubber policeman, pipetted into homogenizer columns (CAT#HCR003; Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, 
GA, USA), and spun at 10,000×g for 30 s. Total protein abundance was quantified using the Bio-Rad DC protein 
assay reagent kit (CAT# 5000111, Bio-Rad Laboratories) and BioRad spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories) 
according to manufacturer’s instructions. Analyses for each sample was performed in triplicate. Results reflect a 
minimum of six biological replicates each with up to 6 parallel wells.
Gelatin coating of glass coverslips.  In order to promote cell adhesion, coverslips were coated with 
 gelatin27. To this end, glass coverslips (CAT#12-545-80; Fisher Scientific) were treated overnight in 16 N nitric 
acid. Nitric acid was removed and the beaker was replenished with Milli-Q 18.2 Ω cm ultra-pure water (Milli-
pore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA). Every 3 h, existing ultra-pure water was replaced with new ultra-pure water 
for a total of 10 times. Individual coverslips were rinsed an additional 10 times with ultra-pure water, dried, and 
autoclaved. Sterile coverslips were placed in 2 c m2 sized tissue culture plate wells (CAT#3524; Corning Costar, 
Kennebunk, ME, USA), washed with PBS, incubated with 0.2% gelatin in PBS at 37 °C for 60 min, washed three 
times with PBS, crosslinked with 1% glutaraldehyde (CAT#A10500; Alfa Aesar, Ward Hill, MA, USA) in PBS at 
room temperature for 30 min, followed by three rinses in PBS. Coated coverslips were stored in PBS at + 4 °C for 
use within one week.
Immunostaining of the cultures and cell-derived matrices.  For immunostaining, 0-, 3-, 7-, 10- and 
14-day GFBL cultures generated on gelatin coated glass coverslips (with cells) and parallel CDMs were washed 
once with PBS, fixed with 4% formaldehyde at room temperature for 20 min, washed three times with PBS, and 
stored at 4 °C in PBS until immunostained. For immunostaining, cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton 
X-100 in PBS for 4 min. Samples were then washed three times with PBS followed by blocking with PBS + (con-
taining  Ca2+ and  Mg2+) containing 10 mg/mL BSA and 1 mg/mL glycine at room temperature for 30 min. Sam-
ples were then incubated with a primary antibody (Supplementary Table S2) diluted in 1 mg/mL BSA in PBS in 
a humidified chamber at 4 °C overnight. The samples were then washed with PBS containing 1 mg/mL BSA and 
0.01% Triton X-100 and then incubated with an appropriate Alexa-conjugated secondary antibody (1:200 dilu-
tion; Alexa 488/594; Thermo Fisher) at room temperature for 1 h. Nuclei were then stained with 300 nM DAPI 
(Thermo Fisher) in PBS for 10 min. Samples were mounted with Immu-Mount™ solution (Thermo Fisher) and 
examined using a Nikon Eclipse 80i Compound Fluorescent Microscope (Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) 
and images were captured using Nikon NIS-Elements Basic Research 4.2 software (Nikon Corporation).
Measurement of nuclear angle deviation, surface area, and aspect ratio.  In order to assess cell 
alignment/orientation in the cultures, mean of standard deviation of the angles of long axis of DAPI-stained 
nuclei relative to a standardized reference point in each image was measured using Fiji (ImageJ2) software (ver-
sion 2.3.0/153q; http:// imagej. net). In order to quantify cell morphology, nuclear surface area, as a measure of 
cell size, and aspect ratio, as a measure of cell  elongation28–31, were calculated. To this end, nuclei were outlined 
using the polygon selection tool and surface areas and aspect ratios were calculated using the measure function 
in the software. For the above measurements, standardized fluorescence microscope images taken with × 20 
objective using stratified random sampling within the middle-third area between the center and periphery of 
each coverslip were used. Measurements represent in total of about 20–100 cells per image in triplicate for each 
coverslip from three biological replicates at each time point. Results are presented as mean + /− SEM for all the 
measurements.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 3
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Cell count determination.  In order to quantify cell numbers in the cultures generated on coverslips, num-
ber of DAPI-stained nuclei were counted manually using the Fiji software. To this end, standardized fluorescence 
microscope images were taken randomly with × 20 objective within the middle-third area between the center 
and periphery of each coverslip. In total seven images per sample were obtained representing 100–600 cells 
per image depending on time point. Mean + /− SEM from four repeated experiments were calculated for data 
presentation.
Quantitation of protein abundance in immunostained samples.  In order to assess protein abun-
dance in the immunostained samples, minimum of three standardized fluorescence microscope images were 
obtained using stratified random sampling as above. Integrated fluorescence density/intensity (the sum of fluo-
rescence intensity from each pixel of each image) was calculated using the measure function in the Fiji software 
as a measure of protein abundance. For comparison of staining intensity for a given molecule over time, relative 
total fluorescence density/intensity and relative fluorescence density/intensity per cell was calculated by normal-
izing values to those obtained from Day 0 samples. For pairwise comparison between cultures generated in dif-
ferent test media at day 14, relative immunostaining density/intensity for a given molecule normalized for one of 
the test treatments was calculated. To assess relative abundance of αSMA stress fibers, standardized thresholding 
function in the Fiji software was applied to each image to exclude staining not associated with stress fibers before 
calculating integrated fluorescence density/intensity per cell as above (Supplementary Figure S1). Results are 
presented as mean + /− SEM from 6 to 12 measurements from two repeated experiments.
Western blotting.  Western blotting was performed as previously d escribed16. Briefly, cultures were washed 
once with PBS, lysed in 1 × Laemmli sample buffer, collected using a rubber policeman, and filtered through 
homogenizer mini columns and total protein concentration determined as above. Equal amount of protein of 
each sample with 2-mercaptoethanol (5%) was separated by SDS/PAGE (7.5%) and transferred onto Hybond 
Protran membrane (Amersham). The membranes were incubated in Odyssey Blocking Buffer (LI-COR Bio-
sciences, Lincoln, NE) for 1 h, followed by incubation with anti-αSMA primary antibody (Supplementary 
Table S2) overnight at + 4 °C. After incubation with species-appropriate IRdye-conjugated secondary antibod-
ies (LI-COR) for 1 h, the blots were washed and scanned with LI-COR Odyssey Infrared Imaging system. The 
results were quantified using ImageJ software (version V1.53U; http:// imagej. net).
Statistical analysis.  Data is presented as mean ± SEM with statistical analysis performed using IBM SPSS 
Software Version 23. Number of independent experiments (n) are indicated in figure legends. Normality of the 
data and equality of variance was tested using Shapiro–Wilk test and Levene’s test, respectively. Statistical com-
parisons were performed using independent samples t-test (two groups and normally distributed) or one-way 
ANOVA (greater than two groups and data normally distributed) followed by either Tukey HSD (when variance 
is equal) or Games-Howell (when variance is unequal) post hoc test.
Results
MMC modulates gingival fibroblast numbers and orientation.  Phase contrast microscopy (Fig. 1A) 
and immunostaining of cytoskeletal β-tubulin (Fig. 1B) and actin (Fig. 1C) showed that in both MMC and 
nMMC culture conditions, cells assumed in general parallel orientation. However, at day 3–14 when cultures 
had reached confluency, cells in MMC condition appeared to be less densely packed with wider intercellular 
spaces than in nMMC cultures (Fig. 1A–C). Staining with DAPI showed that, unlike at day 0 (after 24 h cul-
ture) where cells formed a monolayer, at day 3 nuclei of some cells overlapped indicating that both MMC and 
nMMC conditions were composed of layers of GFBLs (data not shown). This nuclear (cell) overlap appeared 
more common with increasing culture time up to day 14 (Fig. 2A upper inserts). Counting of DAPI-stained 
nuclei (Fig. 2B) or measurement of total RNA levels (Fig. 2D) showed that in both culture conditions cell num-
bers increased significantly over time. However, pairwise comparison of nuclear count (Fig. 2C) or RNA yield 
(Fig. 2E) between the treatments at each time point showed that the number of cells in MMC cultures was sig-
nificantly lower compared to nMMC condition at days 7 and 14. To assess cell morphology in more detail, we 
quantified nuclear surface area (Fig. 2F) and aspect ratio (Fig. 2G), measures that correlate with overall cell size 
and elongation,  respectively28–31. Pairwise comparison of these measurements in MMC and nMMC cultures did 
not show any significant differences at any timepoint (Fig. 2F,G, respectively). However, measurement of average 
angle deviation of the long axis of the nuclei, a measure that describes orientation of long axis of the cells com-
pared to other cells, showed significantly higher angle deviation in MMC compared to nMMC at 14-day cultures 
(Fig. 2A lower inserts and H). Thus, GFBLs cultured in MMC compared to nMMC display significantly reduced 
cell numbers over time and more varied orientation compared to nMMC condition.
MMC modulates gene expression by gingival fibroblasts.  Next, we wanted to find out whether 
MMC regulates gene expression in the GFBL cultures. We focused on genes that encode various ECM proteins 
or their processing enzymes and genes that associate with ECM remodeling (MMPs and TIMPs), ECM deposi-
tion (TGF-β signaling), cell-ECM interactions (integrins), and wound healing (cell–cell communication, myofi-
broblast differentiation, and angiogenesis). We first assessed expression of a set of 32 genes separately in MMC 
and nMMC conditions to find out their expression over time (Supplementary Figure S2). Expression of 13 (41%) 
and 11 (34%) of the above genes was significantly changed over time in MMC and nMMC conditions, respec-
tively (Supplementary Figure S2). Out of these genes in either condition, four were significantly downregulated 
(COL4A1, ELN, SPARC and TGFB1), while 10 were upregulated (BGN, DCN, FMOD, HAS2, MMP1, MMP10, 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 4
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 1.  Characterization of fibroblast MMC and nMMC cultures by phase contrast microscopy and 
immunostaining of cytoskeletal β-tubulin and actin over time. Representative phase contrast microscope (A), 
immunostaining of β-tubulin (B), and staining of total fibrillar actin with fluorescently labelled phalloidin (C) 
images from 6 to 12 standardized images obtained from each time point and treatment from two repeated 
experiments are shown. Inserts show higher magnification of select areas. Images in inserts are individually 
optimized for brightness/contrast. Magnification bars = 40 μm.
TGFB2, LTBP2, LTBP3, LTBP4 and SDF1) over time (Supplementary Figure S2). Majority of the significant gene 
expression changes in both culture conditions occurred when monolayer cultures (day 0) were compared to the 
later time points where cultures had formed three-dimensional (3D) layers (Supplementary Figure S2). Expres-
sion of all the above genes in both MMC and nMMC conditions had stabilized at day 7 as no significant changes 
in gene expression were noted after that time point (Supplementary Figure S2).
Next, we performed pairwise comparisons of gene expression between MMC and nMMC conditions using 
samples collected from 14-day cultures. Out of the 75 genes analyzed, 25 (33%) were significantly differently 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 5
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 2.  Characterization of cell numbers, morphology, and orientation in MMC and nMMC cultures over 
time. (A) Representative standardized images of the cultures with nuclear DAPI stain over time. Lower inserts 
show higher magnification images of select areas with long axis of the nuclei indicated by a line. Upper inserts 
in 14-day images show nuclear overlap as indicated by white tracing of the outlines of nuclei. Magnification 
bars = 40 μm. (B) Statistical comparison of change in cell numbers based on calculation of DAPI stained nuclei 
over time (n = 4 repeated experiments). (C) Pairwise comparison of cell numbers based on calculation of DAPI 
stained nuclei at each time point (n = 4 repeated experiments). (D) Statistical comparison of change in total RNA 
yield over time (n = 6–7 repeated experiments). (E) Pairwise comparison of total RNA yield at each time point 
(n = 6–7 repeated experiments). Comparison of nuclear surface area (F), aspect ratio (G), and angle deviation 
(H) in DAPI stained images over time (n = 3 repeated experiments). Results show mean + /− SEM from repeated 
experiments (C,E–H). Statistical testing was performed by one-way ANOVA (B,D) and independent samples 
t-test (C,E–H), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
expressed in MMC compared to nMMC conditions (Fig. 3). Out of these 25 genes, five were significantly upregu-
lated and 20 downregulated in MMC compared to nMMC cultures (Fig. 3). The upregulated genes encoded for 
the basement membrane laminin subunit LAMB332, laminin receptor integrin α3 subunit (ITGA3)33, fibrillar 
collagen receptor integrin α2 subunit (ITGA2)33, and matrix metalloproteinases MMP1 and MMP3 involved in 
ECM r emodeling34. In contrast, genes that were downregulated by MMC encoded for several ECM proteins, 
including collagen I (COL1A1), collagen V (COL5A1), certain glycoproteins (ELN, SPARC, POSTN) and small 
leucine-rich proteoglycan lumican (LUM), TIMP4 involved in tissue  remodeling35, LOX, LOXL3, LOXL4 and 
PLOD3 that mediate ECM maturation and cross-linking36, various integrin α- and β-subunits, TGFB2, EGR3 
involved in TGF-β s ignaling37, ACTA2 that encodes for α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA), a gene highly expressed 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 6
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 3.  Fibroblast gene expression is modulated by MMC culture condition. Table shows GFBL mRNA 
expression (mean + /− SEM) of 75 genes in MMC relative to nMMC culture condition after 14 days analyzed by 
RT-qPCR. Cell color highlights statistically significant downregulation (green) or upregulation (red) of mRNA 
expression in MMC compared to nMMC culture condition. Statistical testing was performed by independent 
samples t-test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001), n = 4–7 repeated experiments.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 7
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
by profibrotic m  yofibroblasts38, and SDF1 (CXCL12), a chemokine that regulates  angiogenesis37 (Fig. 3). Thus, 
MMC significantly modulates expression of several genes important in establishing and remodeling of GFBL 
ECM niche.
MMC promotes accumulation of ECM proteins in gingival fibroblast cultures.  In order to find 
out whether MMC also modulates protein content in the cultures, we quantified total and relative (normalized 
for cell numbers) protein levels in the cell-ECM layers. Findings showed that total protein levels increased sig-
nificantly in both culture conditions up to day 14 (Fig. 4A). The most noticeable increase in relative protein levels 
occurred at day 7 compared to earlier time points in both MMC and nMMC cultures (Fig. 4C). Pairwise com-
parison showed that MMC cultures had significantly lower levels of total proteins compared to nMMC cultures 
at days 7–14 (Fig. 4B). However, pairwise comparison of protein amounts relative to cell numbers at each time 
point showed that there was no significant difference between the two culture conditions (Fig. 4D).
In order to find out whether MMC modulates accumulation of key ECM molecules, we quantified their 
abundance in the cell-ECM layer in immunostained cultures over time. Collagen I, the major ECM protein pro-
duced by fi broblasts1, showed strong intracellular immunoreactivity at day 0, but at later time points it gradually 
displayed predominantly fibrillar extracellular localization in both MMC and nMMC cultures (Fig. 4E). In MMC 
condition, total collagen I increased significantly up to day 10, while there was no significant change after day 
7 in nMMC cultures (Fig. 4F,G). When collagen I abundance was assessed relative to cell numbers, it showed 
significantly decreasing staining intensity over time in both MMC and nMMC conditions (Fig. 4H,I). Pairwise 
comparison of total (Fig. 4G) and relative (Fig. 4I) collagen I in MMC and nMMC cultures showed strongly 
increased levels in MMC cultures at day 3–14.
Similar to collagen I, collagen IV, a basement membrane  molecule32, also localized mostly intracellularly at 
day 0, but at the later timepoints it showed increasingly extracellular fibrillar accumulation (Fig. 5A). In MMC 
cultures, abundance of total collagen IV increased significantly up to 10 days, while there was no significant 
change after day 7 in nMMC cultures (Fig. 5B,C). When collagen IV levels were compared relative to cell numbers 
over time, there was a significantly decrease in nMMC condition at all time points compared to day 0 (Fig. 5D,E). 
In contrast, MMC cultures showed a significant decrease only at day 3, after which collagen IV levels reached 
similar relative level as found at day 0 (Fig. 5D,E). Similar to collagen I, pairwise comparison of collagen IV at 
each time point showed strongly increased total (Fig. 5C) and relative (Fig. 5E) levels in MMC compared to 
nMMC cultures at all time points.
Immunostaining for cellular fibronectin (EDA-fibronectin), a key cell adhesion ligand and molecule involved 
in ECM  assembly1, was also mostly localized intracellularly at day 0, but both culture conditions showed strong 
fibrillar extracellular fibronectin staining at the later time points (Fig. 5F). In both cultures, abundance of total 
fibronectin increased strongly over time compared to day 0, and reached peak levels by day 3 and 7 in MMC and 
nMMC cultures, respectively (Fig. 5G,H). When fibronectin levels were compared relative to cell numbers over 
time, there was a significant progressive decrease in both MMC and nMMC cultures at all time points (Fig. 5I,J). 
Pairwise comparison of total (Fig. 5H) fibronectin levels at each time point showed only minor differences 
between MMC and nMMC cultures. However, relative fibronectin levels in MMC cultures were significantly 
higher compared to nMMC cultures at all time points (Fig. 5J).
We then analyzed abundance of the basement membrane component laminin  132, tenascin C (TNC) and 
SPARC (osteonectin), two matricellular glycoproteins that modulate ECM accumulation and cell function in 
wound h ealing39,40, and latent TGF-β-binding protein 1 (LTBP1), a protein that binds and stores profibrotic 
latent TGF-β into the E  CM41, in day 14 cultures (Fig. 6A–C). Staining for laminin 1 and SPARC appeared mostly 
intracellular, while tenascin C and LTBP1 showed a fibrillar, ECM-associated staining pattern in both culture 
conditions (Fig. 6A). Quantitation of immunostaining showed significantly higher levels of total (Fig. 6B) and 
relative (Fig. 6C) laminin 1 and tenascin C and relative level of LTBP1 (Fig. 6C) in MMC compared to nMMC 
conditions. In contrast, MMC cultures contained significantly lower total and relative levels of SPARC compared 
to nMMC condition (Fig. 6B,C). Taken together, compared to nMMC condition, MMC promotes significantly 
accumulation of collagen I and IV, cellular fibronectin, laminin 1, tenascin C and LTBP1, while reducing abun-
dance of SPARC in the cell-ECM layer of GFBL cultures.
MMC suppresses expression of myofibroblast markers in gingival fibroblasts.  ECM regulates 
fibroblast differentiation into profibrotic myofibroblasts in vitro and in vivo. Characteristics of myofibroblasts 
include high expression of ACTA2, a gene that encodes for αSMA41. Therefore, we next studied levels of αSMA 
in the two culture conditions over time (Fig. 7A–D). Based on Western blotting (Fig. 7B,C) relative αSMA 
abundance decreased significantly in both cultures over time. Pairwise comparison at each time point showed 
that αSMA levels were significantly lower in MMC compared to nMMC condition at day 3 (Fig. 7C). Next, we 
assessed organization of αSMA into stress fibers, one of the characteristics associated with differentiation of 
fibroblasts into  myofibroblasts41. At day 0, αSMA showed a diffuse cytoplasmic staining pattern and was not 
organized into stress fibers (Fig. 7A). Some cells with αSMA positive stress fibers started to appear in both 
MMC and nMMC cultures at day 3, which became more prevalent in nMMC but not in MMC cultures over 
time (Fig. 7A). Accordingly, quantification of αSMA stress fibers relative to cell numbers showed a significant 
increase in nMMC cultures while there was no change in MMC cultures over time (Fig. 7D). Pairwise compari-
son showed significantly lower levels of αSMA stress fibers in MMC compared to nMMC cultures at day 7–14 
(Fig. 7D). To assess whether other features associated with myofibroblast differentiation are also regulated in 
MMC compared to nMMC condition, we reviewed myofibroblast related gene expression in the 14-day cultures. 
Similar to significantly higher expression of ACTA2 (αSMA) mRNA by GFBLs cultured in nMMC compared 
to MMC condition, they also expressed significantly higher levels of COL1A1, POSTN and ITGB5 (Figs. 3 and 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 8
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 4.  Quantification of total protein amount and characterization of collagen I organization and abundance 
in MMC and nMMC cultures over time. (A) Statistical comparison of change in total protein amount in MMC 
and nMMC cultures over time. (B) Pairwise comparison of total protein abundance at each time point. (C) 
Statistical comparison of change in relative (normalized for cell numbers determined by nuclear DAPI counts) 
protein abundance over time. (D) Pairwise comparison of relative protein abundance at each time point. (E) 
Representative standardized images of collagen I immunostaining from each time point and treatment from 
two repeated experiments. Inserts show higher magnification of select areas. Images in inserts are individually 
optimized for brightness/contrast. Magnification bars = 40 μm. (F) Statistical comparison of change in total 
collagen I abundance over time. (G) Pairwise comparison of total collagen I abundance at each time point. (H) 
Statistical comparison of change in relative (normalized for cell numbers determined by nuclear DAPI counts) 
collagen I abundance over time. (I) Pairwise comparison of relative collagen I abundance at each time point. 
Results show mean + /− SEM (B,D,G,I) and statistical comparison over time (A,C,F,H) from 8 to 11 repeated 
experiments (A–D) and from image analysis performed with 6–12 images obtained from each time point 
and treatment from two repeated experiments (F–I). Statistical testing was performed by one-way ANOVA 
(A,C,F,H) and by independent samples t-test (B,D,G,I), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
7E), genes previously shown to be highly expressed by  myofibroblasts41. Analysis of other cytoskeletal proteins 
showed significantly higher relative β-tubulin but similar actin levels in MMC compared to nMMC cultures 
(Fig. 7F–I). In summary, MMC condition specifically suppresses GFBL αSMA levels compared to other cytoskel-
etal proteins and reduces levels of myofibroblast differentiation markers compared to nMMC cultures over time.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 9
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 10
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
◂Figure 5.  Characterization of collagen IV and cellular fibronectin organization and abundance in MMC and 
nMMC cultures over time. (A) Representative standardized images of collagen IV immunostaining from each 
time point and treatment from two repeated experiments. Inserts show higher magnification of select areas. 
Images in inserts are individually optimized for brightness/contrast. (B) Statistical comparison of change in total 
collagen IV abundance over time. (C) Pairwise comparison of total collagen IV abundance at each time point. 
(D) Statistical comparison of change in relative (normalized for cell numbers determined by nuclear DAPI 
counts) collagen IV abundance over time. (E) Pairwise comparison of relative collagen IV abundance at each 
time point. (F) Representative standardized images of cellular fibronectin (EDA-fibronectin) immunostaining 
from each time point and treatment from two repeated experiments. Inserts show higher magnification of 
select areas. Images in inserts are individually optimized for brightness/contrast. (G) Statistical comparison of 
change in total cellular fibronectin abundance over time. (H) Pairwise comparison of total cellular fibronectin 
abundance at each time point. (I) Statistical comparison of change in relative (normalized for cell numbers 
determined by nuclear DAPI counts) cellular fibronectin abundance over time. (J) Pairwise comparison of 
relative cellular fibronectin abundance at each time point. Results show mean + /− SEM (C,E,H,J) and statistical 
comparison over time (B,D,G,I) from image analysis performed with 6–12 images obtained from each time 
point and treatment from two repeated experiments. Statistical testing was performed by one-way ANOVA 
(B,D,G,I) and by independent samples t-test (C,E,H,J), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Magnification 
bars = 40 μm (A,F).
Novel decellularization method to generate cell-free cell-derived matrices.  Decellularization 
can be used to generate cell-free cell-derived matrices (CDMs) from 3D fibroblast cultures. A widely used decel-
lularization method involves use of an alkaline  NHOH (20 mM)/Triton X-100 (0.5%) and DNase extraction 
4
 protocol42. However, our findings from 14-day nMMC cultures of GFBLs indicated that this treatment does not 
completely remove cytoskeletal actin and β-tubulin from the cultures (Fig. 8A). Therefore, in order to compare 
CDMs generated in presence or absence of MMC, we first tested efficiency of a novel decellularization method 
using treatment with 0.6 μM latrunculin B for 3 h to destabilize the actin cytoskeleton followed by incubations 
with 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and DNase. Phase contrast microscopy of 14-day MMC and nMMC cultures 
showed that latrunculin B treatment caused rounding of cells, which appeared more pronounced in the MMC 
than in the nMMC cultures (Fig. 8B). Subsequent treatments with sodium deoxycholate and DNase resulted 
in removal of all notable cellular elements from both cultures leaving behind a fibrillar ECM (Fig. 8B). Immu-
nostaining of actin and β-tubulin, and of DNA by DAPI, confirmed efficient removal of these elements from the 
cultures (Fig. 8A).
Comparison of composition of gingival fibroblast CDMs generated with or without MMC.  Next, 
to compare CDMs generated using the above novel decellularization protocol, we quantified the total proteins 
in CDMs from 7- and 14-day MMC and nMMC cultures. Similar to cultures containing cells (Fig. 4A), in 
both MMC and nMMC CDMs, total protein amounts increased significantly from day 7 to 14 (Fig. 9B). Rela-
tive protein levels increased over time as well, but only measurements from nMMC cultures reached statistical 
significance (Fig. 9C). Pairwise comparison showed that CDMs from 14-day nMMC cultures had accumulated 
significantly higher amounts of total proteins compared to corresponding MMC cultures (Fig. 9B). However, 
similar to the above findings from cultures containing cells (Fig. 4D), when the protein amounts in the CDMs 
were normalized for cell numbers (Fig. 9C), there were no significant differences between the two culture condi-
tions. We then studied the above ECM molecules in immunostained CDMs from day 3–14 cultures. The findings 
showed that the differences noted in total proteins and a set of ECM proteins between cultures generated with 
MMC compared to nMMC were replicated in the cell-free CDMs generated from the corresponding cultures 
after decellularization (Supplementary Figures S3–5).
Characterization of protein loss due to decellularization in gingival fibroblast CDMs generated 
with or without MMC.  There was a notable decrease of immunostaining intensity of the ECM molecules 
in CDMs compared to GFBLs-containing cultures (Fig. 9A) indicating that decellularization process caused 
this loss. To quantify protein loss in more detail, we first compared abundance of total proteins (Fig. 9B) in 
parallel GFBLs-containing cultures and CDMs. On average total protein yield from MMC cultures at day 7 and 
14 was 240 μg/9.6 c m2 and 320 μg/9.6 c m2 culture well, respectively. After decellularization, the corresponding 
protein yields were reduced to 8 μg and 16 μg, respectively. For nMMC cultures the values were 314 μg/9.6 c m2 
and 397 μg/9.6  cm2 before decellularization, and 11 μg and 26 μg after decellularization, respectively. Pairwise 
comparison of MMC and nMMC cultures indicated that there was no significant difference in protein loss 
between the two conditions (Fig. 9D). However, pairwise comparison at each timepoint showed that cultures 
generated with MMC lost significantly less collagen I compared to nMMC cultures, ranging from 42% to 13% in 
MMC and 55% to 30% in nMMC CDMs at 3 to 14-day time points, respectively (Supplementary Figure S6). In 
contrast, both MMC and nMMC cultures displayed in general similar collagen IV and fibronectin loss. Pairwise 
comparison of tenascin C (loss of about 19%), SPARC (about 53%) and LTBP1 (about 75%), which were assessed 
in 14-day cultures, showed also protein loss after decellularization that was quantitatively similar in both MMC 
and nMMC cultures (Supplementary Figure S6). In contrast, loss of laminin 1 was significantly lower in MMC 
(about 57%) compared to nMMC cultures (about 66%) (Supplementary Figure S6). Taken together, compared to 
nMMC condition, MMC improved significantly retention of collagen I and laminin 1 in the cultures after decel-
lularization. However, decellularization caused marked loss of total proteins and the studied individual ECM 
molecules in both MMC and nMMC cultures.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 11
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 6.  Characterization of laminin 1, tenascin C, SPARC, and LTBP1 organization and abundance in MMC 
and nMMC cultures at day 14. (A) Representative standardized images of laminin 1, tenascin C, SPARC, and 
LTBP1 immunostaining from each time point and treatment from two repeated experiments. Inserts show 
higher magnification of select areas. Images in inserts are individually optimized for brightness/contrast. 
Magnification bars = 40 μm. Pairwise comparison of total (B) and relative (normalized for cell numbers 
determined by nuclear DAPI counts) (C) abundance of laminin 1, tenascin C, SPARC, and LTBP1 at day 14. 
Results show mean + /− SEM from image analysis performed with 6–12 images obtained from each time point 
and treatment from two repeated experiments (B,C). Statistical testing was performed by independent samples 
t-test, **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
Discussion
The purpose of MMC is to generate conditions where molecules are in a crowded environment similar to tissues. 
Our findings showed that MMC promoted deposition of several ECM molecules in the cell-ECM layer in the gin-
gival fibroblast cultures. In particular, accumulation of key ECM proteins (collagen I, cellular fibronectin, tenascin 
C, and LTBP1) and basement membrane components (collagen IV and laminin 1) were significantly increased 
by MMC. In contrast, abundance of SPARC, a matricellular protein that modulates cell-ECM interactions in 
wound h ealing40, was significantly reduced by MMC. Thus, effect of MMC on accumulation of different ECM 
proteins appears distinct. In general, previous studies using primary human fibroblasts from different tissues, 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 12
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 7.  Characterization of myofibroblast-associated markers and cytoskeletal proteins in MMC and nMMC 
cultures. (A) Representative standardized images of αSMA immunostaining from each time point and treatment 
from two repeated experiments. Inserts show higher magnification of select areas. Images in inserts are individually 
optimized for brightness/contrast. Magnification bars = 40 μm. (B) Representative Western blot of αSMA in MMC and 
nMMC cultures at day 3–14. GAPDH was used as loading control. Cropped images of Western blots are shown. (C) 
Quantitation and statistical comparison of change in αSMA abundance at each time point and over time relative 
to GAPDH determined by Western blotting. Results show mean + /− SEM from four repeated experiments. (D) 
Quantification (mean + /− SEM) of αSMA stress fibers by image analysis over time and in pairwise comparison at each 
time point. (E) Quantification (mean + /− SEM) of expression of ACTA2, COL1A1, POSTN and ITGA5 by RT-qPCR 
in MMC relative to nMMC cultures at day 14 (n = 4–7 repeated experiments). (F) Statistical comparison of change 
in relative (normalized for cell numbers determined by nuclear DAPI counts) β-tubulin abundance over time. (G) 
Pairwise comparison of relative β-tubulin abundance at each time point. (H) Statistical comparison of change in 
relative (normalized for cell numbers determined by nuclear DAPI counts) actin abundance over time. (I) Pairwise 
comparison of relative actin abundance at each time point. Results show mean + /− SEM (D,G,I) and statistical 
comparison over time (F,H) from image analysis from 6–12 images obtained from each time point and treatment 
from two repeated experiments. Statistical comparison between time points was performed by one-way ANOVA 
(C,D,F,H) and between treatments at each time point by independent samples t-test (C,D,E,G,I), *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; 
***p < 0.001.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 13
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 8.  Characterization of decellularization methods. (A) Representative standardized immunofluorescence 
images of actin and β-tubulin in 14-day MMC and nMMC cultures before and after N  HOH-TX-100-DNase 
4
or latrunculin B-deoxycholate-DNase decellularization protocols. DNA was stained with DAPI nuclear stain 
(blue). (B) Representative standardized phase contrast microscope images of 14-day MMC and nMMC cultures 
before and after sequential incubations with latrunculin B, deoxycholate, and DNase. Inserts show higher 
magnification of select areas. Images in inserts are individually optimized for brightness/contrast. Magnification 
bars = 40 μm.
including cornea or different areas of skin, have also demonstrated the ability of MMC to promote accumulation 
of various ECM proteins, including collagen I, III, IV, V, and VII, fibronectin, perlecan, and laminin 1. However, 
results have been variable possibly due to differences in culture conditions, MMCs used, and origin of c ells9,43–48.
The above data about distinct abundance of different ECM molecules in MMC cultures suggests that 
mechanical properties of the ECM-niche may also be different compared to nMMC cultures. In fact, MMC has 
been shown to reduce stiffness of ECM by about 60–70% in cultures of neonatal  fibroblasts47,48. Mechanosig-
nalling from ECM is a powerful regulator of gene  expression49. Therefore, according to principle of dynamic 
 reciprocity1,50–53, MMC may promote deposition of compositionally and mechanically distinct ECM-niche by 
fibroblasts, which in turn may regulate various fibroblasts functions such as proliferation, morphology, orien-
tation, and gene expression. In support of this, our findings also showed that MMC significantly changed the 
expression of 25 out of 75 wound healing and ECM-related genes compared to nMMC condition at the 14-day 
endpoint. In particular, MMC induced significant downregulation of 20 genes that encoded six ECM proteins 
(COL1A1, COL5A1, ELN, SPARC , POSTN, and LUM), TIMP4, LOX, LOXL3, LOXL4 and PLOD3 that modulate 
ECM maturation and  stability35,36, various integrin α- and β-subunits involved in cell-ECM interactions, TGF-β 
signaling molecules (TGFB2 and EGR3) that among other things promote ECM deposition by  fibroblasts54,55, 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 14
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 9.  Characterization of cultures and CDMs generated in MMC and nMMC conditions before and after 
decellularization. (A) Representative standardized images of collagen I, collagen IV, cellular fibronectin (EDA-
fibronectin), laminin 1, tenascin C, SPARC, and LTBP1 immunostaining in 14-day MMC and nMMC cultures 
with cells (WC) and after decellularization (CDM) from two repeated experiments. Magnification bar = 40 μm. 
(B,C) Comparison of total (B) and relative (normalized for cell numbers based on nuclear DAPI counts in 
parallel samples) (C) protein amount over time and between MMC and nMMC CDMs. (D) Comparison of total 
protein loss due to decellularization over time between MMC and nMMC CDMs. Results show total protein 
amount (mean + /− SEM) from CDMs relative to corresponding cultures with cells (= 100%) as determined by 
Bradford assay. (B–D) Results show mean + /− SEM from 6 repeated experiments. Statistical testing between 
time points was performed by one-way ANOVA and between treatments at each time point by independent 
samples t-test, *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
myofibroblast-associated ACTA241, and proangiogenic SDF137. In contrast, MMC upregulated expression of 
MMP1 and MMP3, two enzymes involved in ECM  remodeling56,57, ITGA2 and ITGA3, genes encoding integrin 
subunits involved in ECM remodeling and cell adhesion to collagen and laminin,  respectively56,57, and LAMB3 
that encodes the β-chain present in laminin 5 (LM 332)58. Thus, MMC suppressed expression of a set of genes 
that are involved in ECM deposition and increased those involved in ECM remodeling in gingival fibroblasts, 
suggesting an anti-fibrotic effect. Interestingly, when we compared gene expression over time, no significant 
expression changes were noted after day 7, suggesting that while cultures still evolved with regards to protein 
accumulation and cell numbers, the key conditions that regulate gene expression in both MMC and nMMC cul-
tures were already established during the first 7 days. While extensive gene expression analyses as performed in 
this study have not been reported previously, altered expression of a set of genes, including increased expression 
and enzymatic activity of MMPs has been also found in human dermal fibroblast cultures treated with MMC 
(Ficoll 70/400)46,48. However, MMC (Ficoll 70/400) did not alter expression of various collagens, fibronectin, and 
certain cell markers including αSMA in human corneal  fibroblasts43. Thus, gene expression response to MMC 
treatment may be cell type-specific.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 15
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Our results showing reduced cell numbers and apparent wider intercellular spaces between cells in MMC 
cultures suggests that the density of cells in MMC is lower compared to nMMC cultures. The mechanisms by 
which MMC affects cell numbers are not known in detail. It is possible that the ECM niche established under 
MMC is less conducive for cell proliferation and/or promotes quiescence, apoptosis, necrosis or senescence 
resulting in a proportional change in proliferating and non-proliferating cells. These processes can be modulated 
by various factors, including specific interactions of cell surface receptors with distinct ECM ligands, mechanical 
signals from ECM, and activation of ECM-bound growth  factors50,59–62 that maybe distinct under MMC culture 
condition. In addition, the transcriptomic change induced by MMC may be also related to reduced cell numbers 
and/or density of the cultures. This is supported by previous studies with 3T3 and primary fibroblasts showing 
that cell growth, and/or increased cell–cell contacts due to higher cell density, can be linked to regulation of gene 
expression or protein  levels63–71. In addition, altered cell morphology, that may also occur in response to higher 
cell density, can result in distinct gene e xpression72. We also noted significantly more variable orientation of the 
long axis of the cells and apparently wider cell morphology and intercellular spacing based on immunostaining 
of filamentous β-tubulin cytoskeleton in MMC compared to nMMC cultures. Thus, the topological and other 
cues from the ECM, which define cell orientation, morphology and  function73, may also be modulated by MMC.
Increased accumulation of total proteins both in MMC and nMMC cultures over time can be explained by 
increasing cell numbers in both culture conditions. It is noteworthy, however, that similar to primary human 
dermal fibroblasts cultured with MMCs (Ficoll 70/400)44, gingival fibroblasts showed significantly reduced cell 
numbers in MMC compared to nMMC cultures. Consequently, while total protein accumulation in the cell-
ECM layers was significantly higher in nMMC cultures, when results were normalized for cell numbers, both 
MMC and nMMC cultures showed similar protein levels. Comparison of MMC-induced gene expression and 
accumulation of corresponding ECM proteins in the cell-ECM layer showed different results. For instance, 
while quantitation of collagen I and IV, cellular fibronectin, laminin 1, tenascin C, and LTBP1 showed increased 
protein accumulation in MMC cultures, expression of these genes was downregulated (COL1A1) or unchanged 
(COL4A1, EDA-FN1, TNC, LAMA1, and LTBP1) by MMC. ECM proteins, including collagen, produced by 
fibroblasts can be secreted both into the culture medium and assembled into the cell-ECM layer. Use of MMC is 
expected to promote accumulation of secreted proteins into the cell-ECM layer. Therefore, increased accumula-
tion of the above molecules is likely caused by effect of MMC to promote their deposition from the medium to 
the cell-ECM layer rather than MMC-induced transcriptional regulation of gene expression. The only exception 
for the above was SPARC that showed reduced abundance in MMC cultures at both protein and mRNA levels. 
Thus, SPARC levels may be regulated by transcriptional mechanisms that suppress its expression under the MMC 
culture condition. Another possibility is that remodeling of ECM, including collagen, by changes in MMP/TIMP 
ratio, or its maturation that affects its stability, maybe altered. However, the gene expression analysis showed that 
while MMC significantly upregulated MMP1 and MMP3, it downregulated expression of MMP inhibitor TIMP4 
and LOX, LOXL3, LOXL4 and PLOD3, which mediate ECM crosslinking. Thus, it appears that increased ECM 
stability may not explain increased ECM accumulation by MMC, albeit measurement of mRNA levels do not 
necessarily reflect protein abundance or enzymatic activity.
Interestingly, MMC also potently downregulated markers of profibrotic myofibroblast differentiation. Studies 
have indicated that fibroblast cultures in serum containing medium resemble granulation tissue in early wound 
healing where cells are actively proliferating and depositing ECM. In addition, fibroblasts in such culture condi-
tion express a transcriptome that resembles early wound  healing71,74. Therefore, it is interesting that MMC may 
drive gingival fibroblasts in this wound-like situation to a less profibrotic phenotype. Similar suppression of 
αSMA levels suggesting reduced myofibroblast differentiation have also been reported with cultures of primary 
human dermal fibroblasts using MMC (Ficoll 70/400)44. Considering the above changes of αSMA stress fibers 
over time, it was interesting to note that in both nMMC and MMC cultures total αSMA levels (stress fiber-
associated and non-associated αSMA) were significantly reduced with increasing culture time. Thus, it appears 
that considerably higher proportion of αSMA in nMMC cultures is assembled into stress fibers compared MMC 
cultures. Expression of myofibroblast markers, including αSMA, are regulated by various factors, such as com-
position of ECM, including abundance of cellular fibronectin, mechanosignalling from ECM, cell density, and 
presence of growth factors such as TGF-β141,75, but their role in MMC-mediated suppression of myofibroblast 
phenotype is not known.
MMC also promoted deposition/expression of molecules that are associated with the basement membrane. 
In particular, abundance of type IV collagen and laminin 1 was significantly increased by MMC. In addition, 
expression of mRNA for LAMB3, was significantly increased, while expression of COL7A1, encoding collagen 
VII that forms the anchoring fi brils9, was unaltered by MMC. Previous findings using primary abdominal human 
skin fibroblasts have demonstrated increased deposition of collagen IV and VII by treatment with MMCs (Ficoll 
70/400)9, while studies using neonatal human skin fibroblasts have shown conflicting results whether MMC 
(Ficoll 70/400) promotes laminin 1  deposition48,76. Thus, the property of MMC to promote deposition/expression 
of basement membrane zone molecules by fibroblasts may depend on phenotype and/or origin of fibroblasts. 
ECM niche present at the basement membrane zone is a critical regulator of growth and function of epithelial 
stem c ells77. Quiescent fibroblasts that reside in normal connective tissue do not appear to actively secrete base-
ment membrane molecules such as collagen IV and laminin 1 and 5. However, upon activation during certain 
physiological or pathological processes, such as development, wound healing, and cancer stroma or in organo-
typic cultures with keratinocytes, they participate in deposition of these  molecules78–88. Although published data 
is scarce, fibroblasts produce only limited amounts basement membrane molecules in standard cultures and this 
maybe also cell type-specific. For instance, compared to human gingival fibroblasts, skin fibroblasts appear to 
produce only negligible levels of laminin 5 (LM 332) in c ulture89. The ability of MMC to promote deposition of 
basement membrane components by gingival fibroblasts may open a possibility to generate improved organotypic 
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 16
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
cultures consisting of epithelial cells and fibroblasts to study epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and to be 
further developed for regenerative therapy.
Effective decellularization that clears all cellular components, including cytoskeletal molecules and DNA, 
is essential to creating standardized and non-immunogenic cell type-specific CDMs for cell culture studies 
and therapeutic applications. However, the traditional  NHOH/TX-100/DNase cell extraction method that was 
4
originally developed for cultures of mouse embryonic  fibroblasts27 resulted in incomplete removal of cytoskeletal 
filamentous actin and β-tubulin from the human gingival fibroblast cultures. Latrunculin B, an inhibitor of actin 
polymerization and destabilizer of actin  filaments90,91, has been used previously for effective decellularization 
of mouse and chicken muscle  tissue25,92, but it has not been tested with human fibroblast cultures. Our findings 
showed that latrunculin B followed by sodium deoxycholate and DNase treatment was efficient in removing 
cells, actin, β-tubulin, and DNA from the cultures. Further analysis of the CDMs generated from MMC and 
nMMC cultures using this decellularization method showed that the above differences noted in accumulation of 
the individual ECM molecules in the cultures containing cells were replicated also in the corresponding CDMs. 
Thus, MMC and the novel decellularization method can be used to generate distinct fibroblast-derived CDMs for 
further applications. However, we also noted considerable total protein loss (up to > 80%) due to decellularization 
in both MMC and nMMC cultures. This is not surprising considering that the cultures were composed of ECM 
and layers of cells that were growing in high density. Therefore, removing cells, and likely also cell-associated 
molecules, by decellularization is expected to cause dramatic reduction of total proteins in the cultures. Inter-
estingly, protein loss was distinct for different ECM molecules. For instance, almost 80% of cellular fibronectin, 
but only about 20% of tenascin C, was lost due to decellularization in day 14 cultures. This difference could be 
explained by distinct distribution of cellular fibronectin and tenascin C in intracellular, cell surface, and ECM 
compartments and/or by different susceptibility of the ECM proteins to decellularization reagents. Interestingly, 
loss of collagen I was significantly decreased in older cultures compared to earlier time points, suggesting that 
collagen I fibrils become more stable over time. In addition, collagen I loss was significantly lower in MMC 
compared to nMMC cultures. This could be caused by stabilization of collagen fibrils by increase in activity 
of lysyl oxidase and transglutaminase 2 that have been shown to promote collagen crosslinking under MMC 
 conditions5. In any case, based on previous  studies9,44,93,94 and our findings, different decellularization protocols 
may display distinct efficacy to remove cytoskeletal proteins depending on cell type and culture conditions. In 
addition, fibroblast cultures generated with MMC may be partially protected from loss of fibronectin, collagen 
I and IV, and laminin 1.
The present proof-of-principle study provided first evidence of the utility of MMC technology in gingival 
fibroblast cultures. However, finding out tissue type-specific properties of the cultures requires analysis of parallel 
cell cultures isolated from multiple gingival tissue donors and their comparison to cultures with cells isolated 
from other tissues, such as skin. Future studies should also interrogate in more detail levels and function/activ-
ity of key proteins in cultures generated with MMC. These studies should also include large scale proteomes 
of human gingival fibroblast 3D cultures generated with MMC in comparison to the gingival tissue in vivo to 
characterize their similarities and differences in more detail. Based on our findings cell cultures and CDMs gen-
erated with MMC and the novel decellularization protocol could offer new tools to study in vivo-like cell-ECM 
interactions in vitro and provide a substitute for animal experiments. Furthermore, if MMC-derived CDMs 
recapitulate the above anti-fibrotic effect found in MMC cultures, they may have use as a less fibrotic wound 
healing model to study cell–matrix interactions. In addition, they could be developed into novel tissue-specific 
cell-derived biomaterials that can be used to promote scar-free wound healing.
Data availability
The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author 
upon request.
Received: 16 November 2022; Accepted: 1 February 2023
References
 1. Mouw, J. K., Ou, G. & Weaver, V. M. Extracellular matrix assembly: A multiscale deconstruction. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 
771–785 (2014).
 2. Muhl, L. et al. Single-cell analysis uncovers fibroblast heterogeneity and criteria for fibroblast and mural cell identification and 
discrimination. Nat. Commun. 11, 1-18 (2020).
 3. Ellis, R. J. Macromolecular crowding: Obvious but underappreciated. Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 597–604 (2001).
 4. Ellis, R. J. & Minton, A. P. Join the crowd. Nature 425, 27–28 (2003).
 5. Chen, C., Loe, F., Blocki, A., Peng, Y. & Raghunath, M. Applying macromolecular crowding to enhance extracellular matrix deposi-
tion and its remodeling in vitro for tissue engineering and cell-based therapies. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 63, 277–290 (2011).
 6. Satyam, A., Kumar, P., Cigognini, D., Pandit, A. & Zeugolis, D. I. Low, but not too low, oxygen tension and macromolecular crowd-
ing accelerate extracellular matrix deposition in human dermal fibroblast culture. Acta Biomater. 44, 221–231 (2016).
 7. Tsiapalis, D. & Zeugolis, D. I. It is time to crowd your cell culture media—Physicochemical considerations with biological conse-
quences. Biomaterials 275, 1–18 (2021).
 8. Wong, A. P. et al. Conversion of human and mouse fibroblasts into lung-like epithelial cells. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–15 (2019).
 9. Benny, P., Badowski, C., Lane, E. B. & Raghunath, M. Making more matrix: Enhancing the deposition of dermal–epidermal junc-
tion components in vitro and accelerating organotypic skin culture development, using macromolecular crowding. Tissue Eng. 
Part A 21, 183–192 (2015).
 10. Kaltschmidt, B., Kaltschmidt, C. & Widera, D. Adult craniofacial stem cells: Sources and relation to the neural crest. Stem Cell Rev. 
Rep. 8, 658–671 (2012).
 11. Häkkinen, L., Larjava, H. & Fournier, B. P. J. Distinct phenotype and therapeutic potential of gingival fibroblast. Cytotheraphy 16, 
1171–1186 (2014).
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 17
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 12. Longaker, M. T. et al. Adult skin wounds in the fetal environment heal with scar formation. Ann. Surg. 219, 65–72 (1994).
 13. Mak, K. et al. Scarless healing of oral mucosa is characterized by faster resolution of inflammation and control of myofibroblast 
action compared to skin wounds in the red Duroc pig model. J. Dermatol. Sci. 56, 168–180 (2009).
 14. Wong, J. W. et al. Wound healing in oral mucosa results in reduced scar formation as compared with skin: Evidence from the red 
duroc pig model and humans. Wound Repair Regen. 17, 717–729 (2009).
 15. Glim, J. E., Van Egmond, M., Niessen, F. B., Everts, V. & Beelen, R. H. J. Detrimental dermal wound healing: What can we learn 
from the oral mucosa?. Wound Repair Regen. 21, 648–660 (2013).
 16. Mah, W. et al. Human gingival fibroblasts display a non-fibrotic phenotype distinct from skin fibroblasts in three-dimensional 
cultures. PLoS ONE 9, 1–20 (2014).
 17. Guo, F., Carter, D. E., Mukhopadhyay, A. & Leask, A. Gingival fibroblasts display reduced adhesion and spreading on extracellular 
matrix: A possible basis for scarless tissue repair?. PLoS ONE 6, 1–9 (2011).
 18. Mah, W. et al. Elevated CD26 expression by skin fibroblasts distinguishes a profibrotic phenotype involved in scar formation 
compared to gingival fibroblasts. Am. J. Pathol. 187, 1717–1735 (2017).
 19. Fissell, W. H. et al. Ficoll is not a rigid sphere. Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 293, 1209–1213 (2007).
 20. Fissell, W. H., Hofmann, C. L., Smith, R. & Chen, M. H. Size and conformation of Ficoll as determined by size-exclusion chroma-
tography followed by multiangle light scattering. Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 298, 205–208 (2010).
 21. Hakkinen, L., Heino, J., Koivisto, L. & Larjava, H. Altered interaction of human granulation-tissue fibroblasts with fibronectin is 
regulated by α5β1 integrin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1224, 33–42 (1994).
 22. Cukierman, E., Pankov, R., Stevens, D. R. & Yamada, K. M. Taking cell-matrix adhesions to the third dimension. Science 294, 
1708–1712 (2001).
 23. Lareu, R. R. et al. Collagen matrix deposition is dramatically enhanced in vitro when crowded with charged macromolecules: The 
biological relevance of the excluded volume effect. FEBS Lett. 581, 2709–2714 (2007).
 24. Bi, J. et al. Epithelial microvesicles promote an inflammatory phenotype in fibroblasts. J. Dent. Res. 95, 680–688 (2016).
 25. Gillies, A. R., Smith, L. R., Lieber, R. L. & Varghese, S. Method for decellularizing skeletal muscle without detergents or proteolytic 
enzymes. Tissue Eng. Part C 17, 383–389 (2011).
 26. Chaturvedi, V. et al. Interactions between skeletal muscle myoblasts and their extracellular matrix revealed by a serum free culture 
system. PLoS ONE 10, 1–27 (2015).
 27. Franco-Barraza, J., Beacham, D. A., Amatangelo, M. D. & Cukierman, E. Preparation of extracellular matrices produced by cultured 
and primary fibroblasts. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 71, 1–44 (2017).
 28. Uhal, B. D. et al. Cell size, cell cycle, and α-smooth muscle actin expression by primary human lung fibroblasts. Am. J. Physiol. 
Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol. 275, 998–1005 (1998).
 29. Neumann, F. R. & Nurse, P. Nuclear size control in fission yeast. J. Cell Biol. 179, 593–600 (2007).
 30. Chen, B., Co, C. & Ho, C. Cell shape dependent regulation of nuclear morphology. Biomaterials 67, 129–136 (2015).
 31. Wu, Y., Pegoraro, A. F., Weitz, D. A., Janmey, P. & Sun, S. X. The correlation between cell and nucleus size is explained by an 
eukaryotic cell growth model. PLOS Comput. Biol. 18, 1–26 (2022).
 32. Gürses, N., Thorup, A. K., Reibel, J., Carter, W. G. & Holmstrup, P. Expression of VLA-integrins and their related basement mem-
brane ligands in gingiva from patients of various periodontitis categories. J. Clin. Periodontol. 26, 217–224 (1999).
 33. Bachmann, M., Kukkurainen, S., Hytönen, V. P. & Wehrle-Haller, B. Cell adhesion by integrins. Physiol. Rev. 99, 1655–1699 (2019).
 34. Lu, P., Takai, K., Weaver, V. M. & Werb, Z. Extracellular matrix degradation and remodeling in development and disease. Cold 
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3, 1–24 (2011).
 35. Melendez-Zajgla, J., Del Pozo, L., Ceballos, G. & Maldonado, V. Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinases-4. The road less traveled. 
Mol. Cancer 7, 1–11 (2008).
 36. Semenza, G. L. The hypoxic tumor microenvironment: A driving force for breast cancer progression. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1863, 
382–391 (2016).
 37. Liakouli, V. et al. Angiogenic cytokines and growth factors in systemic sclerosis. Autoimmun. Rev. 10, 590–594 (2011).
 38. Klingberg, F., Hinz, B. & White, E. S. The myofibroblast matrix: Implications for tissue repair and fibrosis. J. Pathol. 229, 298–309 
(2013).
 39. Midwood, K. S. & Orend, G. The role of tenascin-C in tissue injury and tumorigenesis. J. Cell Commun. Signal. 3, 287–310 (2009).
 40. Bradshaw, A. D. The role of SPARC in extracellular matrix assembly. J. Cell Commun. Signal. 3, 239–246 (2009).
 41. Pakshir, P. et al. The myofibroblast at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 133, 1–10 (2020).
 42. Vlodavsky, I. Preparation of extracellular matrices produced by cultured corneal endothelial and PF-HR9 endodermal cells. Curr. 
Protoc. Cell Biol. 1, 10 (2001).
 43. Kumar, P. et al. Macromolecularly crowded in vitro microenvironments accelerate the production of extracellular matrix-rich 
supramolecular assemblies. Sci. Rep. 5, 1–10 (2015).
 44. Wong, C. W. et al. In vitro expansion of keratinocytes on human dermal fibroblast-derived matrix retains their stem-like charac-
teristics. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–17 (2019).
 45. Gaspar, D., Ryan, C. N. M. & Zeugolis, D. I. Multifactorial bottom-up bioengineering approaches for the development of living 
tissue substitutes. FASEB J. 33, 5741–5754 (2019).
 46. Fan, C. et al. Application of “macromolecular crowding” in vitro to investigate the naphthoquinones shikonin, naphthazarin and 
related analogues for the treatment of dermal scars. Chem. Biol. Interact. 310, 1–14 (2019).
 47. Satyam, A., Tsokos, M. G., Tresback, J. S., Zeugolis, D. I. & Tsokos, G. C. Cell-derived extracellular matrix-rich biomimetic substrate 
supports podocyte proliferation, differentiation, and maintenance of native phenotype. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1–11 (2020).
 48. Shendi, D. et al. Hyaluronic acid as a macromolecular crowding agent for production of cell-derived matrices. Acta Biomater. 100, 
292–305 (2019).
 49. Chester, D. et al. Elucidating the combinatorial effect of substrate stiffness and surface viscoelasticity on cellular phenotype. J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A 110, 1224–1237 (2022).
 50. Muncie, J. M. & Weaver, V. M. The physical and biochemical properties of the extracellular matrix regulate cell fate. in Current 
Topics in Developmental Biology vol. 130 1–37 (Elsevier Inc., 2018).
 51. Geiger, B., Bershadsky, A., Pankov, R. & Yamada, K. M. Transmembrane extracellular matrix cytoskeleton crosstalk. Nat. Rev. Mol. 
Cell Biol. 2, 793–805 (2001).
 52. Bornstein, P., McPherson, J. & Sage, H. Synthesis and secretion of structural macromolecules by endothelial cells in culture. In 
Pathobiology of the Endothelial Cell (eds Nossel, H. L. & Vogel, H. J.) 215–228 (Academic Press, 1982). 
 53. Bissell, M. J., Hall, H. G. & Parry, G. How does the extracellular matrix direct gene expression?. J. Theor. Biol. 99, 31–68 (1982).
 54. Fang, F. et al. Early growth response 3 (Egr-3) is induced by transforming growth factor-β and regulates fibrogenic responses. Am. 
J. Pathol. 183, 1197–1208 (2013).
 55. Sethi, A., Mao, W., Wordinger, R. J. & Clark, A. F. Transforming growth factor–B induces extracellular matrix protein cross-linking 
lysyl oxidase (LOX) genes in human trabecular meshwork cells. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 52, 5240–5250 (2011).
 56. Cabral-Pacheco, G. A. et al. The roles of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in human diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 1–53 
(2020).
 57. Yue, J., Zhang, K. & Chen, J. F. Role of integrins in regulating proteases to mediate extracellular matrix remodeling. Cancer Micro-
environ. 5, 275–283 (2012).
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 18
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 58. Pulkkinen, L. et al. Cloning of the β3 chain gene (LAMB3) of human laminin 5, a candidate gene in junctional Epidermolysis 
bullosa. Genomics 25, 192–198 (1995).
 59. Zheng, D. Q. et al. Modulation of cell proliferation by the integrin cytoplasmic domain. Kidney Int. 51, 1434–1440 (1997).
 60. Kim, S. H., Turnbull, J. & Guimond, S. Extracellular matrix and cell signalling: The dynamic cooperation of integrin, proteoglycan 
and growth factor receptor. J. Endocrinol. 209, 139–151 (2011).
 61. El-Mohri, H., Wu, Y., Mohanty, S. & Ghosh, G. Impact of matrix stiffness on fibroblast function. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 74, 146–151 
(2017).
 62. Kollmannsberger, P., Bidan, C. M., Dunlop, J. W. C., Fratzl, P. & Vogel, V. Tensile forces drive a reversible fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
transition during tissue growth in engineered clefts. Sci. Adv. 4, 1–10 (2018).
 63. Batt, D. B. & Roberts, T. M. Cell density modulates protein-tyrosine phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 3408–3414 (1998).
 64. Tarzemany, R., Jiang, G., Larjava, H. & Häkkinen, L. Expression and function of connexin 43 in Human gingival wound healing 
and fibroblasts. PLoS ONE 10, 1–31 (2015).
 65. Schutz, L. & Mora, P. T. The need for direct cell contact in “contact” inhibition of cell division in culture. J. Cell. Physiol. 71, 1–6 
(1968).
 66. Rowe, D. W., Starman, B. J., Fujimoto, W. Y. & Williams, R. H. Abnormalities in proliferation and protein synthesis in skin fibroblast 
cultures from patients with diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 26, 284–290 (1977).
 67. Lemons, J. M. S. et al. Quiescent fibroblasts exhibit high metabolic activity. PLoS Biol. 8, 1–16 (2010).
 68. Agren, M. S., Steenfos, H. H., Dabelsteen, S., Hansen, J. B. & Dabelsteen, E. Proliferation and mitogenic response to PDGF-BB of 
fibroblasts isolated from chronic venous leg ulcers is ulcer-age dependent. J. Invest. Dermatol. 112, 463–469 (1999).
 69. Li, X. et al. Establishment and biological characteristics of fibroblast cell lines obtained from wild corsac fox. Vitr. Cell. Dev. Biol. 
Anim. 56, 837–841 (2020).
 70. Umeno, Y., Okuda, A. & Kimura, G. Proliferative behaviour of fibroblasts in plasma-rich culture medium. J. Cell Sci. 94, 567–575 
(1989).
 71. Iyer, V. R. et al. The transcriptional program in the response of human fibroblasts to serum. Science 283, 83–87 (1999).
 72. Thomas, C. H., Collier, J. H., Sfeir, C. S. & Healy, K. E. Engineering gene expression and protein synthesis by modulation of nuclear 
shape. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 1972–1977 (2002).
 73. Kutys, M. L., Doyle, A. D. & Yamada, K. M. Regulation of cell adhesion and migration by cell-derived matrices. Exp. Cell Res. 319, 
2434–2439 (2013).
 74. Chang, H. Y. et al. Gene expression signature of fibroblast serum response predicts human cancer progression: Similarities between 
tumors and wounds. PLoS Biol. 2, 206–214 (2004).
 75. Doolin, M. T., Smith, I. M. & Stroka, K. M. Fibroblast to myofibroblast transition is enhanced by increased cell density. Mol. Biol. 
Cell 32, 1–9 (2021).
 76. Satyam, A. et al. Macromolecular crowding meets tissue engineering by self-assembly: A paradigm shift in regenerative medicine. 
Adv. Mater. 26, 3024–3034 (2014).
 77. Li, J. et al. Spatially resolved proteomic map shows that extracellular matrix regulates epidermal growth. Nat. Commun. 13, 1–17 
(2022).
 78. Buskermolen, J. K. et al. Development of a full-thickness human gingiva equivalent constructed from immortalized keratinocytes 
and fibroblasts. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 22, 781–791 (2016).
 79. Roffel, S. et al. Evaluation of a novel oral mucosa in vitro implantation model for analysis of molecular interactions with dental 
abutment surfaces. Clin. Implant Dent. Relat. Res. 21, 25–33 (2019).
 80. Rousselle, P. & Scoazec, J. Y. Laminin 332 in cancer: When the extracellular matrix turns signals from cell anchorage to cell move-
ment. Semin. Cancer Biol. 62, 149–165 (2020).
 81. Kriegebaum, U. et al. Tissue engineering of human oral mucosa on different scaffolds: In vitro experiments as a basis for clinical 
applications. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Pathol. Oral Radiol. 114, 190–198 (2012).
 82. Nissen, N. I., Karsdal, M. & Willumsen, N. Collagens and Cancer associated fibroblasts in the reactive stroma and its relation to 
Cancer biology. J. Exp. Clin. Cancer Res. 38, 1–12 (2019).
 83. Kulasekara, K. K. et al. Cancer progression is associated with increased expression of basement membrane proteins in three-
dimensional in vitro models of human oral cancer. Arch. Oral Biol. 54, 924–931 (2009).
 84. Fullár, A. et al. Remodeling of extracellular matrix by normal and tumor-associated fibroblasts promotes cervical cancer progres-
sion. BMC Cancer 15, 1–16 (2015).
 85. Chen, X. & Song, E. Turning foes to friends: Targeting cancer-associated fibroblasts. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 18, 99–115 (2019).
 86. Pastar, I. et al. Epithelialization in wound healing: A comprehensive review. Adv. Wound Care 3, 445–464 (2014).
 87. Tsutsui, K. et al. Mapping the molecular and structural specialization of the skin basement membrane for inter-tissue interactions. 
Nat. Commun. 12, 1–18 (2021).
 88. Jayadev, R. & Sherwood, D. R. Basement membranes. Curr. Biol. 27, 207–211 (2017).
 89. Yu, G. et al. Gingival fibroblasts as autologous feeders for induced pluripotent stem cells. J. Dent. Res. 95, 110–118 (2016).
 90. Gibbon, B. C., Kovar, D. R. & Staiger, C. J. Latrunculin B has different effects on pollen germination and tube growth. Plant Cell 
11, 2349–2363 (1999).
 91. Pollard, T. D., Earnshaw, W. C. & Johnson, G. T. Actin and actin-binding proteins. In Cell Biology (eds Pollard, T. D. et al.) 575–591 
(Elsevier, 2017).
 92. Reyna, W. E., Pichika, R., Ludvig, D. & Perreault, E. J. Efficiency of skeletal muscle decellularization methods and their effects on 
the extracellular matrix. J. Biomech. 110, 1–18 (2020).
 93. Xing, Q. et al. Decellularization of fibroblast cell sheets for natural extracellular matrix scaffold preparation. Tissue Eng. Part C 
Methods 21, 77–87 (2015).
 94. Parmaksiz, M., Elçin, A. E. & Elçin, Y. M. Decellularized cell culture ECMs act as cell differentiation inducers. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 
16, 569–584 (2020).
Acknowledgements
Supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR PJT-153223) and the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC RGPIN-2017-05765).
Author contributions
Experiments were designed by R.R. and L.H. R.R. performed experiments, data collection, analyses, and pres-
entation under supervision by L.H. G.J. participated in data processing and analysis. H.L. participated in study 
design and data analysis. All authors participated in writing and editing the manuscript.
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 19
Vol.:(0123456789)

NEW PAGE

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1038/ s41598- 023- 29252-1.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.H.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Scientific Reports |         (2023) 13:2047  |  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-29252-1 20
Vol:.(1234567890)

NEW PAGE