www.nature.com/npjregenmed
ARTICLE OPEN
Plasma-assisted multiscale topographic scaffolds for soft
and hard tissue regeneration
✉
Woochan Kim1,2,6, YonghyunGwon1,2,6, Yang-KyungKim3, SunhoPark1,2, Sung-JuKang3, Hyeng-KyuPark4, Myung-Sun Kim3 and
✉
Jangho Kim 1,2,5
Thedesignoftransplantablescaffoldsfortissueregenerationrequiresgainingprecisecontroloftopographicalproperties.Here,we
proposeamethodologytofabricatehierarchicalmultiscalescaffoldswithcontrolledhydrophilicandhydrophobicpropertiesby
employingcapillaryforcelithographyincombinationwithplasmamodiﬁcation.Usingourmethod,wefabricatedbiodegradable
biomaterial(i.e.,polycaprolactone(PCL))-basednitrogengas(N-FN)andoxygengasplasma-assistedﬂexiblemultiscalenanotopographic
(O-FMN)patcheswithnaturalextracellularmatrix-likehierarchicalstructuresalongwithﬂexibleandcontrolledhydrophilicproperties.In
responsetomultiscalenanotopographicandchemicallymodiﬁedsurfacecues,theproliferationandosteogenicmineralizationofcells
weresigniﬁcantlypromoted.Furthermore,theO-FMNpatchenhancedregenerationofthemineralizedﬁbrocartilagetissueofthe
tendon–boneinterfaceandthecalvarialbonetissueinvivoinratmodels.Overall,thePCL-basedO-FMNpatchescouldacceleratesoft-
andhard-tissueregeneration.Thus,ourproposedmethodologywasconﬁrmedasanefﬁcientapproachforthedesignandmanipulation
ofscaffoldshavingamultiscaletopographywithcontrolledhydrophilicproperty.
1234567890():,; npjRegenerative Medicine           (2021) 6:52 ;https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00162-y
INTRODUCTION complex micro- and nanoscale topographic features suggests its
Designing functional scaffolds to effectively replace, repair, or crucial role in the regulation of physiologically relevant cellular
engineerhumantissuesandorgansisoneofthemostpowerful functions (i.e., morphology, migration, proliferation, and differ-
strategies in the ﬁelds of regenerative medicine and tissue entiation) in vivo7,13. Accordingly, obtaining a structural under-
engineering1,2. The mechanical properties and architectures of standing of the multiscale topography of the ECM can provide
scaffoldsservingastransplantableplatformsshouldbeprecisely important insights for the efﬁcient design and development of
controlledfortheirapplicationtovarioustissuesandorgans3,4.In scaffolds for cell and tissue engineering. Several recent studies
particular, transplantable scaffolds should possess appropriately have demonstrated that scaffolds designed according to the
ﬂexible and foldable characteristics consistent with the anato- multiscale topographical organization of ECMs showed improve-
mical site of the implant5. Such ﬂexible and foldable properties ment in behaviors and functions of cells along with enhanced
allowforthescaffoldstoattachwelltovariousstructuressuchas tissue regeneration14–16. Importantly, scaffolds designed by
theirregularsurfacesofbiologicaltissuesororgansandfacilitate mimicking highly aligned micro- and nanotopographical features
handlingduringsurgicalimplantation.Inaddition,theseproper- of the bone ECM were found to promote not only the fate and
ties are important for the treatment of tissues (e.g., bone, functions of stem cells but also induce bone tissue regenera-
cartilage, muscle, tendon, ligament, and skin) that must be tion17,18. Accordingly, the application of such scaffolds that can
guaranteed for motility during implantation. However, the effectively mimic the multiscaled environment of the well-
design of a functional scaffold requires considerations beyond organized and highly aligned ECM has been highlighted as a
mechanical properties. In particular, the architecture and promising strategy for accelerating tissue regeneration by
structure of scaffolds must be considered alongside their improving cellfunction.
mechanical properties to guarantee stable support as well as Numerous technologies and approaches have been applied to
ensure an active nutrient supply to the regeneration site, cell develop scaffolds that mimic the topographical characteristic of
adhesion induction, and biological interactions toward cells or the ECM for clinical use, such as three-dimensional printing,
tissues6. Therefore, precisely designing scaffolds based on the electrospinning, and lithography19,20,21. In particular, such tech-
biophysical properties of tissues and organs is a powerful nologies are greatly beneﬁcial to recreate the micro- or
approach for regenerative medicine. nanostructuresandtopographyowingtotheirpropertiesofhigh
In vivo, living cells are exposed to and surrounded by cellular resolution, size controllability, and large-area processing without
microenvironments comprised of chemical factors, mechanical requiring sophisticated equipment and complex processes22–24.
factors, cell–cell interactions, and structural factors of the Although various scaffolds with a simple micro- or nanotopo-
extracellular matrix (ECM), which can eventually be converted graphy have been achieved, developing a complex multiscale
into biological signals to regulate the functions, fates, and scaffold with a uniformly multiplex-nanosized topography or
behaviors of cells that ultimately inﬂuence tissue formation and different nanostructures remains a challenge owing to the need
function7–12. The well-deﬁned organization of the ECM with for sophisticated processing steps and limitations of appropriate
1DepartmentofRuralandBiosystemsEngineering,ChonnamNationalUniversity,Gwangju,RepublicofKorea.2InterdisciplinaryPrograminIT-BioConvergenceSystem,Chonnam
NationalUniversity,Gwangju,RepublicofKorea.3DepartmentofOrthopedics,ChonnamNationalUniversityHospital,Gwangju,RepublicofKorea.4DepartmentofPhysicaland
RehabilitationMedicine,ChonnamNationalUniversityMedicalSchool&Hospital,Gwangju,RepublicofKorea.5InstituteofNano-StemCellsTherapeutics,NANOBIOSYSTEMCo.,Ltd,
Gwangju61008,RepublicofKorea.6Theseauthorscontributedequally:WoochanKim,YonghyunGwon.✉email:mskim@chonnam.ac.kr;rain2000@jnu.ac.kr
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
2
fabrication techniques. Even when such complex designs can be and etching of surfaces with increasing plasma treatment times
constructed,developingthelarge-scalemultiplex-nanosizedscaf- (Fig. 1b).
foldsthatcanbeappliedtovarioustissuesororgansforavariety To verify whether the N reaction gas and various plasma
2
ofpurposesandcoversdefects,injuries,wound,orrepairablesite treatmenttimeconditionsusedintheplasmatreatmentprocess
of several tens of centimeters of organs or tissues is limited by affected PCL properties, the polymer’s chemical characteristics
current technical difﬁculties. Above all, it is crucial to design and wereanalyzed.Thefunctionalgroupsofplasma-treatedpatches
manipulatescaffoldswithcontrolledmultiscalesurfaceproperties wereinvestigatedbyFT-IRspectroscopy(Fig.1c).Thecharacter-
forcelland tissue engineering25,26. istic absorption bands related to PCL (i.e., CH asymmetric
2
Guided by these considerations, we here propose a new stretchingat2944cm−1,symmetricstretchingat2866cm−1,C=
approach for scaffold design involving the manipulation of a O stretching vibration of carbonyl groups at 1721cm–1, and
plasma-assisted ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic patch, deformation of C–O at 1161cm–1) were detected in all patches.
whichhasmultiscalestructureswithanalignednanotopography The chemical changes of the plasma-treated PCL patches were
and etched nanoporous topography, by employing capillary notdetectedcomparedtothePCLpatches.Thesurfacechemical
forcelithography(CFL)incombinationwithplasmatreatmentto composition of the N-FN patches was analyzed by XPS.
mimic the porous structure of the ECM. For this purpose, we Comparison of the survey scan spectra of FN and N-FN patches
fabricated US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved showed three separated peaks in all XPS spectra, which
polycaprolactone (PCL)-based N gas- (N-FN) or O gas plasma- correspond to C1s (285eV), N1s (400eV), and O1s (532eV)
2 2
assisted multiscale nanotopographic (O-FMN) patches that (Fig. 1d). A distinct N1s peak at 400eV in the N-FN patch
showednaturalECM-likehierarchicalstructures,includinghighly spectrumindicatedthatN2plasmawassuccessfullyappliedonto
aligned nanoscale matrix (ridges and grooves of ~800nm) with the FN patch. The surface atomic compositions of the FN patch
nanosized pores (~100nm), along with ﬂexible and controlled were calculated to be 73.91%, 0.29%, and 25.81% for C1s, N1s,
hydrophilic properties. Using these O-FMN patches as scaffolds, and O1s, respectively. The surface atomic compositions of the
we investigated the inﬂuence of the multiscale hierarchical N-FNpatchwerecalculatedtobe61.83%,3.34%,and34.82%for
topography and chemically modiﬁed surface cues on the C1s, N1s, and O1s, respectively. The high-resolution XPS N1s
spectraoftheN-FNpatchesshowedthattheN1speaksoftheFN
1234567890():,; paOtisrs-osFulaMiefeNpraarnpotdiaootfncc-ohaafel-vnscadoroinoanclsettbephooet,ngreewengetiiecsnsimnueverianetisenitoriagntlhaizoteaeftdaitonhntiemhoeraoflticamnetﬂloolusrd.eecnInluscf.efaFdtuoedrfnitthditoeohnrne-, amthnaedinFNNN-Fp–NaCt=pchaOtwcha(3es9sc9ca.9alcneuVlba)ete(Fddiegtc.oo1bmee)p.0oT.s5he1ed%aintaotnomdiacthccooosmenﬁpogofunNrea-nFtiNto:nwonaoesf
2.96%forN–C=O.Assessmentofwettabilityofpatchesthrough
more,wequantitativelyinvestigatedtherelativecontributionsof
measurement of the water contact angle showed that FN
aligned nanotopographic cues, nanoporous structure cues, and
patches have a lower contact angle (82.56±1.8°) when
chemicallymodiﬁedsurfacecuesoncellularbehaviorsandtissue
compared with FF patches (88.32±1.7°) (Fig. 2a). The water
regeneration.
contact angle of both FF and FN patches gradually decreased
withincreasingN plasmatreatmenttime,andthe30-minN-FN
2
patcheshadalowercontactangle(17±1.4°)thanthatof30-min
RESULTS
N-FF patches (21±2.1°). The wettability and hydrophilicity of
Characteristics andproperties ofN-FN patches
polymer surface treated with plasma are transient. The hydro-
The abbreviations for all samples in this work are as follows: phobic properties of synthetic polymers are restored several
ﬂexible ﬂat patch (FF patch), ﬂexible nanotopographic patch (FN hours after plasma treatment because uncured hydrophobic
patch), N2 gas plasma-treated ﬂexible ﬂat patch (N-FF patch), N2 polymer chains migrate to the surface30. These phenomena, in
gas plasma-treated ﬂexible nanotopographic patch (N-FN patch), addition to the oxidation process, include charge leakage from
O2 gas plasma-treated ﬂexible ﬂat patch (O-FF patch), O2 thesurface,aswellasmigrationanddiffusionandredirectionof
gas plasma-treated ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic patch polar groups, and therefore depend on the surface treatment
(O-FMNpatch). conditions, material properties, and storage conditions31.
Figure1ashowsaschematicoftheplasmatreatmentprocess Accordingly, we conducted the hydrophobic recovery analysis
used in this study (described in detail in “Methods”). In our to conﬁrm the maintenance of hydrophilicity and the storage
previous works, we reported the structures and topography on period of scaffold surfaces in air and room temperature
microenvironmentofnaturaltendonandboneECMs17,27.Brieﬂy, conditions immediately after the plasma treatment. The
native tendons consist of well-organized and highly aligned plasma-treatedscaffoldswereusedimmediatelyaftertheplasma
collagen ﬁbers in ECMs with ~86% type I collagen of type I and treatmentforinvitroandinvivoexperimentswithinanhour.To
small amounts of type III collagen. These collagen ﬁbers were conﬁrm the hydrophobicity variation on the surface after N
2
cross-linkedwithproteoglycans,revealingcloselypackedparallel plasma treatment on the FN patch, static contact angle
structures28.InthetendonECM,acollagenﬁberiscomposedofa measurements were made at various time points (30min, 1h,
large number of ﬁbrils. Collagen ﬁbers that come together to 2h, 4h, 1 day, 2 days, and 6 days) after plasma treatment (Fig.
form collagen ﬁbers vary in diameter from 500nm to 1μm. 2b). N-FN patches exhibited slight hydrophobic recovery at
Collagenﬁbersareassembledtoformbundles(orfascia)thatare 30minto4handshowedsubstantialhydrophobicrecoveryfrom
~10mm long and 1–20μm in diameter. These ﬁber bundles 1 to 6 days after plasma treatment. However, the hydrophilicity
ﬁnally assemble to form tendon units 20–500μm in diameter29. ofN-FNpatcheswasmaintainedwhencomparedwiththestatic
Cells are mainly located between the collagen ﬁbers and are water contact angle of FN patches.
affected by the aligned collagen parallel array structure and
pores which contributed to the exchange of oxygen and Invitroanalysis ofcell behavioron N-FN patches
provided nutrition. Furthermore, the aligned nanotopographies ToinvestigatewhethertheN plasmatreatmentonthesurfacesof
2
of collagenﬁbers and nanopores are similarly observed in bone FF and FN patches inﬂuenced cell proliferation and attachment,
extracellularmatrix17.SEMimagesofthesurfacemorphologyof we cultured human tenocytes on the patches for 6h (cell
N-FNpatchesrevealedahighlyalignedtopographywithgrooves attachment assay), 3 days (cell proliferation assay), and 5 days
and ridges (~800nm size), similar to the well-organized (cell proliferation assay), respectively (Fig. 2c). After 6h of cell
topography of the native tendon ECM, without deformation culture,unattachedcellswereremovedbywashingwithPBS,and
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
3
1234567890():,;
Fig.1 SchematicofthefabricationandcharacterizationofaN-FNpatch.aFabricationofapolycaprolactone(PCL)-basedFNpatch.Inspired
by the high aligned and well-organized nanotopography of the native ECM, the PCL-based FN patch was fabricated using capillary force
lithography (CFL). Plasma surface modiﬁcation on the surface of the FN patch. The surface of the patches was modiﬁed using N plasma
2
reactiongas.bSEMimagesofthesurfaceofFNpatchestreatedbyN plasmareactiongasundervarioustimes.Scalebars=2µm.cFT-IR
2
analysis of the N-FF and N-FN patches treated plasma at various times. d XPS survey scans and e high-resolution N1s XPS spectra of FN
patchesand30-minN-FNpatches.
cellsattachedtothepatcheswerequantiﬁedbytheWST-1assay. examined by culturing cells on the two scaffolds in osteogenic
Tenocytes were well attached on all patches, irrespective of induction medium for 14 days. Alizarin Red staining (Fig. 2d)
topographic properties, and cells on the 30-min N-FF and N-FN revealed slightly higher calcium expression levels on the 30-min
patches showed higher attachment than did those under other N-FN patches than on other samples and the tissue culture
plasma treatment times. After 3 and 5 days of cell culture, cell polystyrene substrate (TCPS). Although the N-FN patches treated
proliferationwashigheronthe30-minplasmatreatmentpatches for 30min showed the highest degree of quantiﬁcation on the
when compared with those of the other groups (Fig. 2c). The osteogenic mineralization, there was no signiﬁcant difference
osteogenic mineralization of tenocytes on the N-FN patches was fromtheother controlgroups.
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
4
Fig.2 EffectofN-FNpatchesoncellularbehaviors.aWatercontactanglemeasurementoftheN-FNtreatedundervarioustimes(n=10for
eachgroup).bWettabilityrecoveryonthesurfacesof30-minN-FNpatches(n=5).cAttachmentandproliferationofcellsonN-FNpatches.
Quantitative analysis of cell attachment and proliferation on N-FF patches and N-FN patches showed a gradual increase with plasma
treatment time (n=6 for each group). d Effect of N-FN patches on the osteogenic mineralization of tenocytes. Alizarin Red staining and
quantiﬁcation of the degree ofosteogenesis showedthat the30-min N-FN patch promotedhigher calcium expressionlevelsof tenocytes
whencomparedwithothergroups(n=6foreachgroup).Scalebars=200µm.Errorbars=mean±standarddeviation(*P<0.05).
Characteristics andproperties ofO-FMN patches observed due to etching and volatilization, which were not
Figure 3a shows a schematic of the plasma treatment process generated in the N-FN patches. The O-FMN patches showed the
usedinthisstudy(describedindetailin“Methods”).SEMimages uniform distribution of various pore sizes and more pores,
of the surface morphology of the O-FMN patches revealed a depending on the O2 plasma treatment time compared to the
highlyalignedtopographywithgroovesandridges,similartothe O-FFpatches(Fig.3bandSupplementaryFig.1).Theaveragepore
well-organizedtopographyofthetendonECM(Fig.3b).Nanosized sizesof30minO-FMNand30minO-FFpatcheswereanalyzedas
pores generated by O plasma treatment for 30min were 192.84and145.16nm,respectively.Theseresultsareduetowhen
2
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
5
Fig. 3 Characterization of the O-FMN patch and effect of the O-FMN patch on cellular behaviors. a Schematic of plasma surface
modiﬁcationusingO plasmareactiongasonthesurfaceoftheFNpatch.bSEMimagesoftheO-FMNpatchundervarioustreatmenttimes.
2
ThesurfacetopographyoftheO-FMNpatchshowedthegenerationofnanoporestructureswithoutdamagetothealignednanotopography.
Scalebars=2µm.cFT-IRanalysisofthe30-minO-FMN.dXPSsurveyscansandehigh-resolutionO1sXPSspectraofFNpatchesand30-min
O-FMNpatches.fWatercontactanglemeasurements(n=10foreachgroup)andwettabilityrecovery(n=5)onsurfacesoftheO-FMNpatch.
gAttachmentandproliferationofcellsonO-FMNpatches(n=6foreachgroup).After5daysofcellculture,cellproliferationwashigheron
the30-minO-FMNthanonthe30-minN-FN.hEffectofO-FMNpatchesontheosteogenicmineralizationoftenocytes.AlizarinRedstaining
revealedhighercalciumexpressionlevelsonthe30-minO-FMNpatchesthanonothersamplesandthetissueculturepolystyrenesubstrate
(TCPS). Quantiﬁcation of osteogenic mineralization demonstrated the highest degree of osteogenesis by the cells on the 30-min O-FMN
patches(n=6foreachgroup).Scalebars=200µm.Errorbars=mean±standarddeviation(*P<0.05).
oxygen plasma is treated on the ﬂat surfaces of polymeric separatedpeakscorrespondingtoC1s(285eV),N1s(400eV),and
materials, the collision radius or sidewall collision of the reactive O1s (532eV). A distinct O1s peak at 532eV in the O-FMN patch
oxygenspeciesoccurssigniﬁcantlyless.Incontrast,onthesurface spectrum indicated that the O plasma had been successfully
2
with nanotopography, the sidewall collision and the collision appliedontotheFNpatch.Thesurfaceatomiccompositionsofthe
radiusincreaseduetothediffusionofreactiveoxygenspeciesin FN patch were calculated to be 73.91%, 0.29%, and 25.81%, and
thenanostructures,sothatthebombardmentandoxidizingeffect thoseoftheO-FMN patcheswerecalculated tobe63.7%,0.23%,
occurs actively, forming numerous largepores32. and 36.07% for C1s, N1s, and O1s, respectively. The high-
However, these pores did not result in notable deformation to resolution XPS O1s spectra showed that the O1s peak of the FN
thehighlyalignednanotopography.Thisresultindicatedthatthe andO-FMNpatchescanbedecomposedintothreecomponents:
generationofnanosizedporesontothealignednanotopography C–O component (531.69eV) and C=O (532.39eV), and O=C–O
could form multiscale nanostructures similar to the complex (533.3eV)components(Fig.3e).Theatomicconﬁgurationsofthe
microenvironment of the ECM. Thus, we hypothesized that the FNpatchwerecalculatedtobe11.7%,6.83%,and7.49%forC–O,
combination of multiscale nanostructures comprising nanopores C=O,andO=C–O,respectively.Theatomicconﬁgurationsofthe
and a well-deﬁned nanotopography and functional groups O-FMN patch were calculated to be 10.29%, 13.48%, and 11.97%
applied by O plasma treatment would provide a physiochemi- for C–O, C=O, and O=C–O, respectively. The wettability of the
2
cally synergetic effect to improve cell afﬁnity along with cell O-FF and O-FMN patches was evaluated by water contact angle
functionand tissue regeneration. measurement,showingthatFNpatcheshadalowercontactangle
To conﬁrm whether the O reaction gas used in the plasma (82.56±1.8°)thanFFpatches(88.32±1.7°)(Fig.3f).Similartothe
2
treatment process changed PCL properties, the chemical char- N-FFandN-FNpatch,thewatercontactangleofO-FFandO-FMN
acteristicsofthepolymerwereanalyzed.Thefunctionalgroupsof patches after plasma treatment were decreased, and 30-min O-
the O-FMN patch were investigated by FT-IR spectroscopy (Fig. FMNpatcheshadalowercontactangle(18.4±1.1°)thandid30-
3c). The characteristic absorption bands related to PCL (i.e., CH min O-FF patches (22.01±2.2°). To conﬁrm the hydrophobicity
2
asymmetric stretching at 2944cm−1, symmetric stretching at variationonthesurfaceofO-FMNpatches,thestaticcontactangle
2866cm−1, C=O stretching vibration of carbonyl groups at measurements were conducted over O plasma treatment time
2
1721cm–1, and deformation of C–O at 1161cm–1) weredetected (30min,1h,2h,4h,1day,2days,and6days).AsshowninFig.3f,
in all samples, showing that functional groups were well O-FMNpatchesexhibitedsmallhydrophobicrecoveryat30minto
maintained and were not affected by plasma treatments. The 4handsubstantialhydrophobicrecoveryat1dayto6daysafter
surface chemical composition of the O-FMN and FN patches was plasma treatment. However, the hydrophilicity of the O-FMN
analyzed by XPS. As shown in Fig. 3d, all XPS spectra had three patch was well maintained compared with the high static water
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
6
contact angle of FN patches. To conﬁrm whether the generation performedtoevaluatethehistologicqualityontheconnectionof
of the pores on the scaffold surfaces affects the change in collagen ﬁbers in the tendon–bone interface, orientation and
mechanicalstrength,thetensilestrengthsoftheFF,FN,30minO- density of the collagen ﬁbers, maturity of the tendon–bone
FF, and 30min O-FMN patches were measured using a tensile interface, and cell conﬂuency of the regenerated RC tendon and
tester and assessed (Supplementary Fig. 2). When a load was mineralized ﬁbrocartilage tissue 4 weeks after repair with non-
applied along the direction of the aligned topography, the FN treatedpatches,30-minN plasma-treatedpatches,and30-minO
2 2
patcheswiththealignednanotopographyexhibitedslightlylarger plasma-treated patches (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 3). No
tensile stress (~10.38MPa) than that (~9.62MPa) of FF patches infection,contracture,mobilitydisability,orinﬂammatoryreaction
with the ﬂat topography. However, the 30min O-FF patches and were observed in any of the rats throughout the postoperative
the 30min O-FMN patches with nanopores generated oxygen period. The tissues from rats treated with the N (N-FF and N-FN
2
plasma treatment showed no signiﬁcant difference compared to patches) and O (O-FF and O-FMN) plasma-treated patches
2
the FF patch and the FN patch, respectively (Supplementary Fig. showednativerattendontissue-likehistologicalhealingpatterns
2).ThistrendwasmeasuredinbreakpointstrainanalysisofFF,FN, (Supplementary Fig. 4), with high ratios of tendon tissue
30minO-FF, and 30minO-FMNpatches. regeneration observed in the sections under the patches. The
RCtendonsrepairedusingtheFNpatchesshowedwell-organized
collagen ﬁbers of high density, whereas those of the FF control
Invitrocell behaviors on O-FMNpatches
groups showed sparse ﬁbrous tissue and low cell conﬂuence of
Cell attachment and proliferation on N-FN and O-FMN patches
theboneandﬁbrocartilageatthewoundsite(Fig.4c).Inaddition,
were both higher than those on FF patches. In addition, after
the tendon tissues treated with the N (N-FF and N-FN patches)
5daysofcellculture,cellproliferationwasconsiderablyhigheron 2
and O (O-FF and O-FMN) plasma-treated patches showed
O-FMN patches treated with O plasma for 30min than that 2
2 organizationofthecollagenﬁberssimilartothatofnativetendon
observedon30-minN-FNpatches(Fig.3g).Thissuggeststhatthe
tissues, with increased amounts of cellular at the tendon–bone
surface modiﬁed by O plasma may provide various cell-friendly
2 interface compared to those of non-treated groups. The
functional groups and hierarchically topographical environments
ﬁbrocartilage tissues at the tendon–bone interfaces treated with
that are similar to the complex microenvironment of the ECM,
the O-FMN patch showed a more well-organized vertical
thus promoting the proliferation and attachment of tenocytes
arrangement compared to those of the non-treatment groups
when compared with the surface modiﬁed by N plasma. In
2 and N-FN patch groups. Importantly, the ﬁbrocartilage tissues at
addition,weexaminedtheosteogenicmineralizationoftenocytes
the tendon–bone interfaces from rats treated with the O-FMN
on the N-FN and O-FMN patches by culturing cells in osteogenic
patch showed a vertical arrangement, alignment, and increased
induction medium for 14 days. Alizarin Red staining (Fig. 3h)
amounts of cellular similar to the native tendon tissue (Fig. 4c).
revealed higher calcium expression levels on the O-FMN patches
The O-FMN patch had an obvious positive inﬂuence on the
for 30min than on N-FF and N-FN patches for 30min and the
collagen organization, connection, and tendon tissue regenera-
TCPS.Quantiﬁcationof osteogenicmineralization further demon-
tion, resulting in a structure similar to that of native RC tendon
strated the highest degree of osteogenesis by cells cultured on
tissues and ﬁbrocartilage tissues at the tendon–bone interface.
the 30-min O-FMN patches. These results suggest that plasma
These results indicate the importance of a precisely aligned
treatment of FN patches may provide cell-friendly functional
nanotopography and nanosized pore, which generated the
groups and topographical environments to enhance the attach-
multiscale structure of the native ECM microenvironment to
ment,proliferation,anddifferentiationoftenocytes.Therefore,the
effectivelyguide tendon tissue and ﬁbrocartilage regeneration.
highly aligned nanotopography, generation of nanosized pores,
Basedonthequalitativehistologicalanalysisoftheeffectofthe
andvariousfunctionalgroupsinducedbyplasmatreatmentusing
O-FMNpatch presented as arepair strategy for RC tendon tissue
O gas synergistically contributed to the proliferation and
2 rupture, a semiquantitative histology analysis was performed
differentiation oftenocytes.
usingtheBonarscoringsystem(Fig.4dandSupplementaryTable
1). Cell morphology, ground substance, collagen arrangement,
Invivo animalstudy forsoft- andhard-tissue regeneration and vascularity changes were observed in all groups and were
RCtendontearsareoneofthemostcommoncausesofshoulder graded depending on Bonar score (Supplementary Table 2). The
pain33.SurgicalrepairsofRCtendontearshavehighre-tearrates, cell morphology and collagen arrangement scores of the O-FMN
and thus many devices have been developed to augment the patch group were signiﬁcantly lower than those of other groups
repair efﬁcacy34. However, repairing defected mineralized ﬁbro- (Fig. 4d). The ground substance and vascularity scores of the
cartilageofthetendon–boneinterfacethatcausesthehighre-tear O-FMN patch group were similar to the score of the O-FF patch
rateofRCremainsachallenge.Here,weproposeanapproachfor group but were signiﬁcantly lower than those of other patch
the regeneration of mineralized ﬁbrocartilage tissue of the groups. Overall, the total histological score of the O-FMN patch
tendon–bone interface. According to the results of in vitro group was signiﬁcantly lower than those of other patch groups
analyses with tenocytes, we determined the optimum plasma (Fig. 4d). These results indicate the importance of the oxygen
treatmenttimeandplasmareactiongas(O vs.N )basedontheir plasma treatment, a precisely aligned nanotopography, and the
2 2
effects on cell proliferation and differentiation. Since the O-FMN nanoporousstructuresinsyntheticECMsforguidingtendontissue
patch mimicking the multiscale ECM nanostructure with various andﬁbrocartilageregeneration.
functional groups could provide an efﬁcient environment for cell In addition, we conﬁrmed the effects of N and O plasma
2 2
proliferationandosteogenicmineralization,wehypothesizedthat treatment and nanotopograhpy throughout bone regeneration
the O-FMN patch with a highly aligned nanotopography, invivo(Fig.4e).Allmiceusedintheinvivostudiessurvivedtothe
nanosized pore, and various functional groups would effectively dateofsacriﬁce,noadverseeventswereobserved.FNpatch,N-FN
guide RC tendon and mineralized ﬁbrocartilage tissue regenera- and O-FMN patch were engrafted onto the calvarial bone defect
tion. To conﬁrm the tissue regeneration efﬁcacy of the O-FMN with 5mm diameter (Fig. 4e). No infection or inﬂammatory
patch,an acute RC tendon tearrat modelwas established. response was observed in any mice during the postoperative
Figure 4a shows the procedure of implantation of patches at period. The implanted patches were maintained for 6 weeks
the RC repair site (i.e., all samples were implanted after without deformation. To conﬁrm the bone regeneration efﬁcacy
tenorrhaphy immediately following artiﬁcial tendon rupture). All from N and O plasma treatment and nanotopograhpy, we
2 2
rats survived to the designated sacriﬁce date, and no adverse conductedtheH&Estainingat6weeksafterimplantation(Fig.4f).
eventswereobserved.Hematoxylinandeosin(H&E)stainingwas As the result, the bone of the defect groups was empty in the
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
7
Fig.4 EffectoftheO-FMNpatchesonthetendonandbonetissueregeneration.aSurgicalprocedureforRCtendonrepair.Allpatches
weregraftedontothedefected tendontissueafter tenorrhaphyof thetornRCtendon(n=3foreach group).bRepresentativehistologic
imagesofH&EstainingandcMassontrichromestainingoftheinsertionsiteofFF,FN,30-minN-FF,30-minN-FN,30-minO-FF,and30-minO-
FMN patches onto the supraspinatus tendon 4 weeks after repair. Scale bars=200µm. d Semiquantitative analysis of the histological
evaluationscoresonrepairedtendontissuesofRCtearanimalmodels.eSurgicalprocedureforratcalvarialbonerepair(n=5foreachgroup).
fRepresentativehistologicimagesofH&EstainingoftheinsertionsiteofFN,N-FN,andO-FMNpatchesontoratcalvarialbone6weeksafter
repair. Scale bars=1mm.g Representative micro-CT image after 3and 6 weeks of repair. Scale bars=5mm(3 weeks). Scale bars=1mm
(6weeks).hQuantitativeanalysisofbonevolumeandareaoftheboneregenerationsiteafter3and6weeksofrepair.Errorbars=mean±
standarddeviation(*P<0.05).
defectarea.Moreboneformationanddensecytoplasmoccurred 47.92mm2 in the O-FMN patch groups (Fig. 4h). The results of
inO-FMNpatches comparedto other groups wereconﬁrmed. bone regeneration and formation provide insight into the
To quantitatively evaluate the effects of nanotopography and importance of nanotopography and O plasma treatment cues
2
plasmatreatmentonboneformation,weperformedmicro-CTand forinducing hard-tissueregeneration.
3D-image conversion using the MIMICS 14.0 software on new
bone defects in vivo. As shown in Fig. 4g, formation of bone by
Quantitative investigation ofrelativecontributions
thenanotopographicandplasma-treatedpatchesoccurredalong
Based on these in vitro and in vivo results, we quantiﬁed the
the periphery of the bone defect and grew along the patches.
capability of tissue regeneration and cell function enhanced by
After3,6weeks,thecompactboneformationwasnotobservedin
the beneﬁcial effects of the O-FMN patch on proliferation and
the defect group, FN patch groups, and N-FN groups whereas
boneregenerationwassigniﬁcantlyenhancedintheO-FMNpatch differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 5). Quantitative investigation
groupsafter3,6weeksofimplantation.Thenewboneformation of relative contributions was derived by setting the raw average
wasobservedfromedgetocenterdependingonnanotopograhpy values of the proliferation and osteogenic mineralization absor-
direction. At the 6 weeks, the bone volume was 1.91mm3 in the bance of the FF patch as 1, and calculating relatively the
defectgroup,2.43mm3intheFNpatchgroups,and3.38mm3in absorbance of the FN, 30-min N-FF, 30-min N-FN, 30-min O-FF,
theN-FNpatchgroups,and4.25mm3intheO-FMNpatchgroups and30-minO-FMNpatches.ThealignednanostructureoftheFN
(Fig. 4h). The bone area was 19.81mm2 in the defect groups, patch, functional groups applied by N plasma treatment, and
2
26.09mm2FNpatchgroups,37.92intheN-FNpatchgroups,and nanosized pores and functional groups generated by the O
2
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
8
plasmatreatmentcouldonlypromoteproliferationbyafactorof morphology,migration,proliferation,differentiation,andmetabo-
1.01,1.12,and1.1,respectively,andosteogenicdifferentiationwas lism of cells. In conjunction with these aspects, we developed a
promoted by a factor of 1.37, 1.32, and 1.44, respectively. The methodology to fabricate a multiscale scaffold with a highly
combination of a nanotopography and N plasma treatment aligned nanotopography in combination with a nanoporous
2
increased proliferation and osteogenic differentiation by a factor structure inspired by the complex topographical features of the
of 1.36 and 1.4, respectively. In addition, the combination of naturalECM.First,tofabricatethehighlyalignednanotopography,
nanotopographyandO plasmatreatmentsigniﬁcantlyincreased we used CFL technology, which can easily control the micro- or
2
theproliferationandosteogenicdifferentiationbyafactorof1.74 nanotopography sizes and structures with scalable and highly
and1.78,respectively,furtherconﬁrmingtheenhancedeffectsof reproducible properties using various biomaterials as well as
highly aligned nanotopography, nanosized pores, and functional polymeric materials17,50,51. Second, to fabricate the nanoscale
groups.Thissynergeticeffectmaybeduetoimprovementincell porous structure onto this highly aligned nanotopography, we
topography or cell–cell interactions from the highly aligned employed O plasma surface treatment, which can structurally
2
nanotopography and nanosized pores generated by O plasma modify the polymeric surface owing to the volatility of chemical
2
treatment. bonding52–54. Various reaction gases such as nitrogen, oxygen,
argon,andairhavebeenusedinplasmatreatmentforpolymeric
surface modiﬁcation55. Among the various gases for the surface
DISCUSSION plasmamodiﬁcationsofbiomaterials,O plasmasurfacemodiﬁca-
2
Developingafunctionalscaffoldiscrucialforeffectivelyreplacing, tionhasbeenprovenasaneffectiveandinexpensivestrategyto
repairing, or engineering human cells, tissues, and organs to alterphysicochemical,mechanical,andbiologicalpropertiessuch
restoreorestablishnormalbiologicalfunction4,9,35.Inparticular,a as roughness, wettability, hardness, and biocompatibility56. The
transplantablescaffoldshouldbedesignedtoallowforcontrolof oxygen plasma induces pore formation by etching the polymer
the mechanical properties, architectures, structures, biodegrad- surfacethroughthereactionofsurfacecarbonatomswithvarious
ability, and biocompatibility to suit the purpose for regenerating oxygen species in the plasma, including electrons, ions, radicals,
thefunctionofthetissuesororgansofinterest.Basedonthekey andneutralmolecules,toproducevolatilereactionproductssuch
consideration of designing a transplantable scaffold, we devel- asH OandCO .Theformationofporesisduetotheimpactand
2 2
oped ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic patches (O-FMN) oxidation effects on the polymer surface induced by energetic
inspired by the in vivo-like microenvironment of the ECM of ionsand radicals present in theoxygen plasma57.Although both
tendontissuebyemployingCFLandplasmatreatmentusingthe oftheoxygenandnitrogengasplasmaintroducechemicalgroups
FDA-approved PCL polymer, which possesses advantageous tothepolymersurface,thenitrogengasplasmaisnotresponsive
properties of biocompatibility and biodegradability. Thus, we enough to generate porous structures of the surface of the PCL
consideredfourmajorfactorsfordesigninganefﬁcientscaffoldas scaffolds because it has signiﬁcantly lower reactivity with carbon
atransplantableplatform:(i)ﬂexibilitywithrespecttomechanical atomsthanoxygengasplasma58.Inaddition,O plasmahasbeen
2
properties, (ii) topographical properties, (iii) biodegradability, and used to produce carboxyl, carbonyl, and hydroxyl functional
(iv)biocompatibility. groups altering surface chemistry and increasing hydrophilicity
(i) Flexibility with respect to mechanical properties: The onto the surface of various polymers to improve cell attachment
mechanicalpropertiesofascaffoldshouldbedesignedtomatch and strength of adherence to these plasma-treated surfaces cell
withtheimplantationsitetissuesorshouldbesufﬁcienttoshield attachment, proliferation, and differentiation59. Thus, we suggest
cells from destructive compressive or tensile forces without an efﬁcient design methodology combining CFL and oxygen
inhibiting suitable biomechanical signals while allowing for plasma treatment to obtain a scaffold with multiscale nanotopo-
persistence under physiological conditions36,37. In particular, graphy for creating native ECM-like structures for advanced
achieving ﬂexible bio-integrated scaffolds against the highly soft applications oftissue engineeringand regenerativemedicine.
and irregularly shaped surfaces of human tissues has been a (iii and iv) Biodegradability and biocompatibility: In this study,
primary goal for diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities16,38. we selected the PCL polymer to design the transplantable
Accordingly, using a PCL polymer, we developed a patch-type scaffolds due to its suitability for tissue regeneration and wide
ﬂexiblesubstrate fortransplantationinhuman tissueprior tothe applicationsinthebiomedicalengineering.PCLisoneofthemost
implementation of multiscale nanotopography onto the PCL- widely used polymers for fabricating biomedical scaffolds due to
basedﬂexiblesubstrate.PCLpolymerisoneofthemajorsynthetic its controllable biodegradability within months to years depend-
polymers used for the fabrication of scaffolds as biomaterials in ing on the molecular weight, crystallinity of the polymer, and
the biomedical ﬁeld owing to its good mechanical strength, degradationconditions17,60–66.PCLhastheabilitytopromotethe
extremely high elongation potential, and suitable ﬂexibility formation and growth of new tissues, and its performance
depending on the thickness of the scaffold39–41. Therefore, we degrades when sufﬁcient tissue regeneration occurs, while
assert that PCL-based ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic (O- supportinganddisposingofdefects,makingitasuitablematerial
FMN) patches provide the ability to intimately contact the forreplacingorrepairingdamagedtissue.Furthermore,sincePCL
curvilinear, actively moving surface of living biological tissues isrelativelyinexpensiveinadditiontobeingalreadyapprovedby
such as the skin, muscles, cartilage, and tendon because of the theUSFDA,scaffoldsbasedonPCLpolymercouldbemoreeasily
thinand ﬂexible properties. commercializedthanthosebasedonotherbiomaterials.Thus,PCL
(ii) Topographical properties: In the ECM microenvironment, is one of the ideal materials for developing the implantable
various cells are exposed to very complex and controlled scaffoldsfortissue regeneration orreplacement ofa defective or
topographical signaling cues with different combinations of damagedorgan.However,althoughPCLhasbiocompatibilityand
micro- and nanoscales such as aligned collagen structures, mesh biodegradability, its low bioactivity (associated with the absence
collagenstructures,andtheporousstructureoftheECMinvarious of bioactive chemical groups on its surface) and low surface
tissues11,42. In conjunction with these aspects, previous studies energy clearly reduce cell afﬁnity and inhibits cell interactions,
have described various artiﬁcial ECM platforms inspired by the thereby slowing tissue regeneration64. Therefore, the use of
nativeECMmicroenvironment, whichhave uniquestructural and synthetic polymers (including PCL) for the development of
topographical properties, such as the bone17,25,43,44, skin7,45, efﬁcient scaffolds for tissue engineering must overcome these
muscle35,46, and tendon27,47–49. Consequently, these scaffolds limitations. To address this issue, we used plasma treatment to
designedincompliancewiththemultiscaletopographicalproper- enhance cell afﬁnity and bioactivity to fabricate surface-modiﬁed
ties of the ECM appear to be crucial to control and improve the hydrophilic scaffolds. Plasma modiﬁcation can improve the
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
9
hydrophilicity of polymers by inducing speciﬁc functional groups owing to multiscale nanotopography cues with an aligned
on the surface, thereby altering the chemical signature, wett- nanotopography and nanoporous structure. The aligned nanoto-
ability, and energy without altering the bulk properties. In pography and porous properties of the patch can be more
addition,theplasmatreatmenthasefﬁcientpropertiestochange efﬁciently applied to the complex microenvironment of the
the chemistry and structures of the surface with high control mineralized ﬁbrocartilage and bone compared to a single scale
without additional solvents, allowing for reducing the chemical nanotopography design. Furthermore, these structural properties
reagents used and their intrinsic sterility due to the presence of inthelivingcellenvironmentsplayanimportantroleinproviding
highlyenergetic species67. an active nutrient supply as well as enabling enhanced tissue
Comprehensively, as a design methodology to fabricate a bonding and precise cell-topography interactions that are
transplantablescaffold, wepropose severalstrategies toimprove required to guide cells toward the nanotopographical cue for
bioactivityandbiofunctionality.PCL-basedFMNpatcheshavethe reconstructing tissue in a manner similar to native tissue
ability to intimately contact a curvilinear surface. Inspired by the formation. Moreover, the ﬂexible and hydrophilic properties of
complex multiscale structure and nanotopographical features of ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic patches provided compact
the native ECM, a material with a multiscale topography, and a adaptation to the curved tissue surface of the tendon–bone
nanoporousandalignednanotopographywereconstructed onto interface and bone for easy handling during surgical procedures.
ﬂexible PCL substrates using CFL technology and O2 plasma Thus, the mechanical and structural properties of the O-FMN
etchingforenhancedcellularfunctionsandbehaviorsintermsof patch might improve cellular functions and behaviors to
architecturalproperties.Toovercomethelimitationswithrespect eventually promote tendon andbone tissue regeneration.
tocellafﬁnityandbioactivityduetothehydrophobicpropertyof Theinvitroandinvivoexperimentsdemonstratedtheeffectof
PCL, the PCL substrates were treated with N2 or O2 plasma, multiscale nanotopographic cues with an aligned nanotopogra-
therebyinducingcertain functional groups on thesurface. phy and nanoporous structure on the enhanced behaviors and
Ourinvitrostudyyieldedthreeinterestingﬁndingsintermsof
functionsofcellstopromotetissueregeneration.Onthebasisof
the highly aligned nanotopographical cue and nanoporous
our study, weproposeother potential biomedicalapplications of
structure of the multiscale structures along with the effects of
this PCL-based O-FMN patch. For example, this scaffold or
the plasma treatment on cellular behaviors. First, the highly technology may allow for the fabrication of precisely deﬁned
alignednanotopographicalcuesimprovedosteogenicmineraliza-
complex multiscale (micro- or nanosized) substrates for tissue
tion. Second, N plasma treatment for 30min onto the highly
2 regenerationinvariousorgans(e.g.,theskin,nerve,tooth,muscle,
aligned nanotopographical patch and ﬂat patch enhanced cell
and heart). Recently, stem cell-based therapy has been high-
proliferation. In particular, the combination of N plasma
2 lighted as another promising strategy for maximizing the
treatment for 30min and the highly aligned nanotopographical regeneration of various tissues68–70. Accordingly, our O-FMN
cues signiﬁcantly improved osteogenic mineralization. Based on
patch could be integrated with a stem cell platform to obtain
theseﬁndings,wehypothesizedthatplasmatreatmentfor30min
better control and enhancement of stem cell behaviors and
canmaximizetheefﬁciencyofcellularbehaviors.Third,O plasma
2 functions as well as to prevent their loss in the targeted tissue
treatment for 30min generated nanopores, and the multiscale
area.Moreover,thisplatformofaﬂexiblepatchtypecanbeused
nanotopographical cues with the aligned nanotopography and
to design and fabricate transplantable biomaterials that require
nanoporousstructuresconsiderablyimprovedcellproliferationas
ﬂexibility, such as artiﬁcial blood vessels, dental membranes,
well as the osteogenic mineralization of cells. Consequently,
wounddressings,andartiﬁcialelectronicskin,giventheabilityfor
in vitro study showed that the O-FMN patch with an aligned
compact adaptation to the underlying tissue. Overall, this study
nanotopographyandnanoporousstructure,alongwithadditional
provides new insight into the design of efﬁcient multiscale
chemical functionality by plasma treatment provides a suitable
topography-based scaffolds forvarious biomedicalapplications.
environment for cell growth and function. Based on our
Inthisstudy,wetriedtoshowthepotentialfortheeffectiveness
observation on proliferation and osteogenic mineralization, we
of the novel scaffolds for soft- and hard-tissue regeneration in
propose the following possible mechanism for the enhancement
on a ﬂexible multiscale nanotopographic patch (Supplementary rotator cuff tear and cranial defects in animal models. (Fig. 4).
Sincewedemonstrated theimportantevidence onthe functions
Fig.5):
of scaffold (e.g., morphological analysis and histological evalua-
1. Enhanced cellular behaviors from the nanotopography, tion) in this study, especially for clinical applications, detailed
based on (i) the enhanced proliferation factor [from 1 (FF invivostudies(e.g.,largeanimalmodels,biomechanicaltests,and
patch) to 1.01 (FN patch)] and (ii) enhanced osteogenic physiological functions, etc.) should be performed using the
mineralization factor [from 1(FF patch) to1.37 (FNpatch)]. proposedscaffolds.
2. Enhanced cellular behaviors from plasma treatment, based Inconclusion,Ahierarchicalmultiscalepatchcanbeusedasan
on(i)theenhancedproliferationfactor[from1(FFpatch)to efﬁcient methodology for the design and manipulation of
1.12(N-FFpatch)andfrom1(FFpatch)to1.1(O-FFpatch)], scaffoldswithaﬂexiblemultiscaletopographytoenhancecellular
and (ii) enhanced osteogenic mineralization factor [from 1 behaviors and tissue regeneration. FMN patches with precisely
(FFpatch)to1.32(N-FFpatch)andfrom1(FFpatch)to1.44 controlled hydrophilic properties and hierarchical nanostructures
(O-FFpatch)]. of the surface were fabricated via CFL and plasma surface
3. Enhanced cellular behaviors due to the combination of modiﬁcationusingaPCLpolymer.Weproposethatahierarchical
nanotopography and plasma treatment, based on the (i) multiscale scaffold comprising nanotopographic and chemically
enhanced proliferation factor [from 1.01 (FN) to 1.36 (N-FN modiﬁed surface cues could provide a native ECM-like physico-
patch)andfrom1.01(FNpatch)to1.74(O-FMNpatch)],and chemical microenvironment for controlling the proliferation and
(ii)enhancedosteogenicmineralizationfactor[from1.37(FN osteogenic mineralization of cells. N or O plasma-assisted
2 2
patch)to1.4(N-FNpatch)andfrom1.37(FNpatch)to1.78 multiscale nanotopographic scaffolds showed good potential for
(O-FMNpatch)]. regeneration of the tendon, the mineralized ﬁbrocartilage, and
Using the O-FMN patch, we demonstrated that the complex bone tissue. Consequently, our quantitative investigation collec-
ECM-like multiscale nanotopography feature could promote the tively demonstrated that combinations of an aligned nanotopo-
tissue regeneration of the mineralized ﬁbrocartilage of the graphic, nanoporous structure, and chemically modiﬁed surface
tendon–bone interface and calvarial bone. This ﬁnding was due cues could enhance effects on cellular behaviors. Our study
to the enhanced cell proliferation and osteogenic mineralization provides insight into the design and manipulation of a ﬂexible
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
10
multiscale topography with controlled hydrophilic properties for 30min each under 30W generation power, 60 sccm gas ﬂow rate, and
promotingsoft- and hard-tissue regeneration. 5.52e−1Torrpressure.
Characteristics andproperties analysis
METHODS
Designandfabrication ofaﬂexible nanotopographic (FN) N-FF and N-FN patches treated for 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30min were
analyzed, and O-FF and O-FN patches treated for 0 and 30min were
patch
analyzed using a high-resolution ﬁeld-emission scanning electron micro-
Becauseofthesurfacechargeofthesiliconwafer,thenanotopographical scope(FE-SEM),Fouriertransform-infraredspectroscopy(FT-IR),andX-ray
PCLpatchimprinteddirectlyonthesiliconwaferwasnoteasilypeeledoff.
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). FE-SEM images of the surface of all
Therefore,weusedthePDMSmold,whosesurfaceisanegativecharge,to
patches fabricated in this study were observed using a JSM-7500F
easilypeeloffthePCLpatches.Inaddition,heatandpressureappliedin
microscope (Oxford, UK) at an acceleration voltage of 15.0kV and an
thefabricationprocesstofabricatethenanotopographicalPCLpatchcan
average working distance of 8.8mm. The samples were coated with
easilycausedamagetothesiliconwafermastermold.Thislimitationdoes
platinum prior to morphological observation. Chemical characteristics of
not guarantee reproducibility to fabricate a large number of the
plasma-treatedﬂatpatchesandplasma-treatednanotopographicpatches
nanotopographical PCL patches for various experiments. Therefore, to
maintain reproducibility of the original nanostructure by minimizing were analyzed to conﬁrm their chemical variation. The chemical bond
damages,amothermoldswerefabricatedwithPDMSandPUA,andthen structures were examined by FT-IR (Spectrum 400, USA). The surface
thenanotopographicalPCLpatcheswereindirectlyfabricatedusingit. chemical composition was analyzed using XPS (K-ALPHA+, Thermo
The detailed methods have already been reported by our group27. A Scientiﬁc,USA).TheXPSsurveyspectrawererecordedusingamonochro-
dropletofultraviolet(UV)-curablepolyurethaneacrylate(PUA)(Changsung maticAlKαsource(1486.67eV)withaspotsizeof200µmandanelectron
Sheet.,Korea)precursorsolutionwithaphotoinitiatorwasdroppedontoa take-offangleof90°.Thetypicalbasepressurewasbelow2×10−9mbar.
silicon master mold, on which nanosized (800nm) linear grooves and Survey spectra were recorded in the range of 0–1350.0eV with a pass
ridgeswereetchedusingconventionalphotolithographyandreactiveion energy of 200eV, step size of 1.0eV, and dwell time of 10.0ms. The
etching. The mold was then uniformly covered with a transparent poly mechanicalproperties(i.e.,stressandstrain)ofthepatches(width:12mm
(ethyleneterephthalate)(PET;SKC,Korea)ﬁlmutilizingcapillaryforce.After andlength:20mm)weremeasuredusinganMCT-1150tensiletester(A&D
themastermoldwasexposedtoUVlight(λ=352nm,40w)for60s,the Company,Japan)atacrossheadspeedof100mm/min.Thesampleswere
cured nanopatterned PUA replica was peeled off from the master mold analyzedbyapplyingloadalongthedirectionofalignednanotopography.
usingtweezersandagainexposedtoUVlightovernighttoeliminateany
The sample was measured at a crosshead distance of 10mm from the
residual reactive acrylate groups. First, the nanopatterned PUA mother
centerofthesample.
moldwasattachedtoaPetridishwiththenanotopographicsurfacefacing
up. A polydimethyl siloxane (PDMS) pre-polymer (Sylgard 184 Silicon
elastomer,DowCorning,USA)wasmixedwitha10%curingagent,poured Watercontact angle measurements
ontothenanopatternedPUAmothermoldina Petridishto asufﬁcient Thestaticwatercontactangleofliquidswasmeasuredusingcustomized
thickness (~1cm), and baked at 70°C for at least 6h to ensure curing camera systems with a Computer M1214-MP2 2/3” Fixed Lens and
withoutanyresidueformation.ThecurednanopatternedPDMSmold(800-
analyzedusingtheImageJsoftware.N-FFandN-FNpatchestreatedfor0,
nmridgesandgrooves)wasthenpeeledofffromthePUAmothermoldin
1,5,10,20,and30minwereanalyzed,andO-FFandO-FNpatchestreated
tchoempPeartirsiodni,sah.ﬂTatosiflaicbornicawteafethrewaﬂseaxtibtalechﬂeadtto(FFth)epPaetcthridaisshawciothnttrhoelﬂfoart for 30min were analyzed. For each measurement, 10μL of water was
dropped onto thesurfaceoraperiod of1min.Thewatercontactangle
surfacefacingup.Similartothefabricationprotocolofthenanopatterned
was measured as a tangent to the droplet interface of the patch.
PDMSmold,thesamePDMSpre-polymerwasmixedwiththe10%curing
agent, poured onto the ﬂat silicon wafer in the Petri dish to a sufﬁcient Measurements were repeated and averaged at least ﬁve times for each
thickness (~1cm), and baked at 70°C for at least 6h to ensure curing sample.Allexperimentswereperformedatroomtemperature.
withoutanyresidueformation.Thecuredﬂat-patternedPDMSmoldwas
thenpeeledofffromtheﬂatsiliconwaferinthePetridish. Isolationand cultureoftenocytes
PCL pellets (Mw: 80,000; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were dissolved in
The detailed methods have already been reported by our group27. The
dichloromethaneusing a magnetic stirrer, and a PCL solution of 18wt%
tendon tissue samples were collected from the supraspinatus tendon of
(wt/wt)indichloromethane(DaejungChemicals&MaterialsCo.,Ltd,Korea)
was prepared. A thin PCL patch was fabricated by spin-coating the PCL patientsduringarthroscopicrotatorcuff(RC)repairsurgeryafterobtaining
solutionthatwaspouredintoa1.5-mmcircularglassonthevacuumcuck informedconsentfrompatientsatChonnamNationalUniversityMedical
ofthespincoater.Thespin-coatingconditionwasasfollows:rotatorspeed Schooland ChonnamNationalUniversityHospital (CNUH-2013-065). The
of 3500rpm, duration of 120s, and acceleration time of 5s. First, we tendon tissue samples were washed with phosphonate-buffered saline
fabricatedtheFFpatchasacontrolgroupbecausethesurfaceofthespin- (PBS;Sigma-Aldrich,USA),cutintosmallpieces,anddigestedwith3mg/ml
coatedPCLpatchhasirregularroughnessthatlimitsthefabricationofan collagenase(Sigma-Aldrich,USA)inDulbecco’smodiﬁedEagle’smedium
FNpatch.ThefabricatedthinPCLpatchwasplacedontothesiliconwafer (DMEM; Cellgro, USA) at 37°C for 16h. After enzymatic digestion, equal
substrateface-uptomeltthePCLlayeronahotplatefor60sat80°C.The volumes of DMEM were added to quench the collagenase and ﬁltered
ﬂat-patternedPDMSmoldwasplacedandembossedontothepre-melted through cell strainers (70-μm mesh). The ﬁltered cell suspension was
PCLlayerbyapplyingpressurewithsmoothﬁngerforcewhileheatingat centrifugedat1500rpmfor5min.Thecellpelletswereresuspendedand
80°Cfor2min.Afterthethermalimprintingprocess,theassemblyofthe culturedinDMEMlow-glucose(Cellgro,USA)supplementedwith10%fetal
PCLlayeroncircularglassandPDMSmoldswascooledat25°Cfor30min, bovineserum(FBS;Cellgro,USA))and1%penicillin-streptomycin(GenDE-
andthePDMSmoldwaspeeledofffromthePCLlayeronthecircularglass,
POT,Houston,TX,USA)at37°Cina5%CO atmosphere.Themediumwas
resultinginanFFpatch.Andthen,FFpatcheswereusedtofabricateFN changedevery3days.Allcellsusedinthi2sworkwereatpassages4–6.
patches.ThefabricationprocessoftheFNpatchisalmostsimilartothatof
FFpatch,exceptthatitusesananopatternPDMSmold.Inthisstudy,all
patches were separated from the circular glass by washing with 70% Cellattachment andproliferation analysis
ethanolforimplantationintheinvivostudy. Tenocytes (1×104 cells/samples) were seeded onto the samples and
culturedfor6h,3days(cellproliferation),and5daysinDMEMcontaining
Plasmamodiﬁcation 10% FBS and 1% antibiotics (Cellgro, USA) at 37°C in a humidiﬁed
The fabricated FF and FN patches were washed with ethanoland dried. atmospherecontaining5%CO2.Quantitativeanalysisofcellproliferation
Surface treatment of patches was carried out using a CUTE-1MP (Femto on the samples was performed using a WST-1 assay (Premix WST-1 Cell
Science,Korea)low-pressureplasmasystem.Beforeprocessing,theempty ProliferationAssaySystem,TakaraBioInc.,Kusatsu,Japan).Toconﬁrmcell
chamber was cleaned for 5min with O gas plasma (30W generation attachment,thepatcheswerewashedusingPBStoremoveanycellsnot
2
power,60sccmgasﬂowrate,and5.52e−1Torrpressure).N andO gas attached to the scaffolds prior to quantitative analysis using the WST-
2 2
plasmatreatmentswereperformedfor1min,5min,10min,20min,and 1assay.
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
11
Osteogenic mineralization analysis supraspinatus tendon of both shoulders of each rat was harvested.
Tenocytes(4×104cells/sample)wereculturedfor14daysonsamplesin Specimens were ﬁxed in neutral buffered 10% formalin (pH 7.4) and
osteogenic differentiation medium (100nM dexamethasone, 50μM decalciﬁed with Calci-Clear Rapid (National Diagnostics, Atlanta) for
ascorbicacid,and10mMglycerol2-phosphateinnormalmedia).Alizarin 2 weeks, and parafﬁn blocks were made in the repair site including
Red S (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) stainingwas used to conﬁrm the osteogenic supraspinatus tendon and greater tuberosity. Sections (4μm thickness)
differentiation(accordingtothedegreeofmineralization)oftenocyteson were cut in the coronal plane and stained with H&E and Masson’s
sample surfaces. The stained cells were de-stained with cetylpyridinium trichrome.Weassessedcellularity,collagenﬁbercontinuity,orientation,
chloride(Sigma-Aldrich,USA),andtheextractedsolutionsweremeasured density,andmaturationofthetendontotheboneinterface,andwealso
usinganabsorbancereader(iMarkTMMicroplateAbsorbanceReader,Bio- evaluatedtheinﬂammationratearoundthepatchatthetendon-to-patch
Rad,Hercules,CA,USA)at595nmtoquantifytheosteogenicdifferentia- interface. Images were captured and acquired using an Aperio Image-
tionoftenocytes. Scope (Leica, CA, USA) software. General histological evaluation was
performed with hematoxylin and eosin (×200 magniﬁcation), Masson’s
trichrome(×200magniﬁcation),andPicrosiriusred(×100magniﬁcation)
Invivo animalstudy stained slides of chronic RC tear animal models. The slides were
The detailed methods have already been reported by our group27. The evaluated using the semiquantitative grading scale of Bonar score,
animal study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Chonnam which assesses four variables (cell morphology, ground substance,
National University Medical School and Chonnam National University collagenarrangement,andvascularity)ofthetendontoboneinterfaces.
Hospital (CNUHIACUC-18013). Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 350–450g A four-point scoring system is used, where 0 indicates a normal
pergroupwereequallydividedintotheFFpatchgroup,FNpatchgroup, appearance and 3 a markedly abnormal appearance (Supplementary
N-FFpatchgroup,N-FNpatchgroup,O-FFpatchgroup,andO-FMN.The Table1)71–73.Thetotalhistologicalscoresforeachgroupwerecalculated
N-FF,O-FF,N-FN,andO-FMNpatchestreatedfor30mineachwereused from the sum of these four characteristic grades. Four sections were
foranimalstudy.Theratswerefullyanesthetizedwithanintramuscular randomlyselectedfromeachgroupandwereevaluatedblindlybythree
injection of 35mg/kgketamine (YouhanCorporation,Seoul,Korea) and independentassessors.Theaveragescorewasusedforcomparison.The
5mg/kgxylazinehydrochloride(Rompun;BayerHealthCare,Korea).Both calvarial bone tomography was performed using Skyscan001172 (Sky-
shouldersofeachratwereshavedanddisinfectedwithpovidone-iodine scan, Konitch, Belgium) micro-computed tomography (Micro-CT) at a
(Firson,Korea),andtheanimalswereplacedinalateralpositionwiththe resolutionof 11.38pixelsandexposuretimeof 316ms,withanenergy
forelimbsinadductionandexternalrotation.A2.0-cmskinincisionwas source of 80kV and current of 124µA. An average of 488 slices of
made over the scapulohumeral joint, subcutaneous tissues were calvarial bone was scanned. The Micro-CT images were analyzed using
dissected,andtheomotransverseandtrapeziusmuscleswereretracted MIMICS14.03Dimagingsoftware(Materialise’sInteractiveMedicalImage
to expose the supraspinatus tendon (located superior to the scapular Control System, Leuven, Belgium). The calvarial bone specimens were
spine).TheacuteRCmodelwasestablishedbythesharpreleaseofthe ﬁxedin10%formalinanddecalciﬁedina0.5MEDTA(pH7.4)solutionat
supraspinatus tendon at the greater tuberosity of the humerus over a room temperature for 7 days. After the specimens were embedded in
5mm width, and surgical RC repair was performed immediately after parafﬁn,cutinto5-µm-thicksections.Andthen,theywerestainedwith
creating the supraspinatus tendon tear. The torn supraspinatus tendon H&E.ImageswereobtainedbytheAperioImagesScope(Leica,CA,USA)
wasrepairedwith2.0Ticron(Tyco, Waltham)inatransosseousmanner software.
aftercreatingableedingbedatthefootprintofthe greatertuberosity.
Twobonetunnelswerecreatedatthearticularmarginofthefootprintto Statistical analysis
the lateral humeral cortex. The suture was passed through the bone
All quantitative data are presented as the mean±standard deviation.
tunnels and tied, and the supraspinatus tendon was reattached to the UnpairedStudent’sttestswereusedforthestatisticalanalysisofthecell
footprint.TheFFpatch(n=3),FNpatch(n=3),N-FFpatch(n=3),N-FN
adhesion,viability,anddifferentiationresults.Tocomparethreeormore
patch(n=3),O-FFpatch(n=3),andO-FMNpatch(n=3)wereusedto
conditions,aone-wayANOVAwasperformed.Pvalueoflessthan0.05was
augmenttherepairsitebystitchingtheproximalportionofthepatchto statisticallysigniﬁcant.StatisticalanalysesoftheMicro-CTwereperformed
thesupraspinatustendonandthedistalportionofthepatchtothesoft usingKruskal−WallistestingwithSPSSsoftware.
tissue at the lateral portion of the proximal humerus. All patches
(dimension: 16×24mm) were well adhered to the defect site of
supraspinatustissueandsufﬁcientlycoveredonthetendontothebone Reporting summary
interface of the rotator cuff. The fascia and subcutaneous tissues were FurtherinformationonresearchdesignisavailableintheNatureResearch
sutured using interrupted 3–0 vicryl sutures (Ethicon, Johnson and ReportingSummarylinkedtothisarticle.
Johnson, USA), and the skin was sutured with interrupted 4–0 prolene
sutures. All rats tolerated this procedure without any intraoperative
complications.Aftersurgery,analgesis (Trodon Inj, 1mg/ml, AjuPharm, DATAAVAILABILITY
Korea)andantibiotic(Baytril50inj.(enroﬂoxacin),1mg/ml,Bayer,Korea)
Alldatathatsupporttheﬁndingsofthisstudyareavailablefromthecorresponding
were administered by intramuscular injection. The shoulders were not
authoruponreasonablerequest.
immobilizedpostoperatively.Ratswerehousedindividuallyandhadfree
accesstowaterandfood.Theratsweresacriﬁced4weeksaftersurgery
toobtaintissuesincludingthetendon,ﬁbrocartilage,andboneregionsof Received:1 February2021; Accepted: 4August 2021;
therotatorcuff.
Inaddition,theanimalstudywasapprovedbytheEthicsCommitteeof
Chonnam National University. 6-week-old, male mice (C57Bl/6N) were
assigned into four groups of four each: Defect, Nano, N-FN patch, and
O-FMN.Themicewerefullyanesthetizedwithanintraperitonealinjection
REFERENCES
zoletil0.006cc/10gandrumpun0.004cc/10g,theheadswereshavedand
disinfected. The bones were exposed by incising the skin approximately 1. Montgomery, M. et al. Flexible shape-memory scaffold for minimally invasive
3.0cmabovethecalvariabone.Thebonedefects(diameter:5mm)were deliveryoffunctionaltissues.Nat.Mater.16,1038(2017).
made on one side of the revealed calvarial bone using an electric drill. 2. Ribeiro, C. et al. Electroactive poly(vinylidene ﬂuoride)-based structures for
Prepared patches (Diameter: 5mm) were placed on the calvarial bone advancedapplications.Nat.Protoc.13,681(2018).
defect.Aftersuturingtheskinwithsutures,theambienttemperaturewas 3. Dvir,T.etal.Nanowiredthree-dimensionalcardiacpatches.Nat.Nanotechnol.6,
raised,andmicewerewakedupfromanesthesia.Themiceweresacriﬁced 720(2011).
3and6weeksaftersurgerytoobtaintissuesincludingthedefectregion 4. Kim, H. et al. Flexible elastomer patch with vertical silicon nanoneedles for
andthecalvarialbone. intracellularandintratissuenanoinjectionofbiomolecules.Sci.Adv.4,eaau6972
(2018).
5. O’brien, F. J. Biomaterials & scaffolds for tissue engineering. Mater. today 14,
Histological observations andevaluation 88–95(2011).
The detailed methods have already been reported by our group27. The 6. Park,S.etal.Hydrogelnanospikepatchasaﬂexibleanti-pathogenicscaffoldfor
proximal humerus including the greater tuberosity head with attached regulatingstemcellbehavior.ACSNano13,11181–11193(2019).
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
12
7. Jangho,K.etal.Directionalmatrixnanotopographywithvariedsizesforengi- 40. Kim,H.N.etal.Patterningmethodsforpolymersincellandtissueengineering.
neeringwoundhealing.Adv.Healthc.Mater.6,1700297(2017). Ann.Biomed.Eng.40,1339–1355(2012).
8. Seo,J.etal.Multiscalereverseengineeringofthehumanocularsurface.Nat. 41. Gross,R.A.&Kalra,B.Biodegradablepolymersfortheenvironment.Science297,
Med.25,1310–1318(2019). 803–807(2002).
9. Moroni,L.etal.Biofabricationstrategiesfor3Dinvitromodelsandregenerative 42. Mouw,J.K.,Ou,G.&Weaver,V.M.Extracellularmatrixassembly:amultiscale
medicine.Nat.Rev.Mater.3,21–37(2018). deconstruction.Nat.Rev.Mol.CellBiol.15,771(2014).
10. Wegst,U.G.K.,Bai,H.,Saiz,E.,Tomsia,A.P.&Ritchie,R.O.Bioinspiredstructural 43. Du,Y.,Guo,J.L.,Wang,J.,Mikos,A.G.&Zhang,S.Hierarchicallydesignedbone
materials.Nat.Mater.14,23(2014). scaffolds: from internal cues to external stimuli. Biomaterials 218, 119334
11. Hussey,G.S.,Dziki,J.L.&Badylak,S.F.Extracellularmatrix-basedmaterialsfor (2019).
regenerativemedicine.Nat.Rev.Mater.3,159–173(2018). 44. Kim,J.etal.Synergisticeffectsofnanotopographyandco-culturewithendo-
12. Kim,S.etal.Synergisticeffectsofgelatinandnanotopographicalpatternson thelial cells on osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells. Biomaterials 34,
biomedicalPCL patches for enhanced mechanical and adhesion properties. J. 7257–7268(2013).
MechanicalBehav.Biomed.Mater.114,104167(2020). 45. Kim,H.N.,Hong,Y.,Kim,M.S.,Kim,S.M.&Suh,K.-Y.Effectoforientationanddensity
13. Tay, C. Y., Irvine, S. A., Boey, F. Y., Tan, L. P. & Venkatraman, S. Micro‐/nano‐ ofnanotopographyindermalwoundhealing.Biomaterials33,8782–8792(2012).
engineeredcellularresponsesforsofttissueengineeringandbiomedicalappli- 46. Morgan,K.Y.etal.Multi‐materialtissueengineeringscaffoldwithhierarchical
cations.Small7,1361–1378(2011). porearchitecture.Adv.Funct.Mater.26,5873–5883(2016).
14. Bae, W.-G. et al. Bio-inspired conﬁgurable multiscale extracellular matrix-like 47. Orr,S.B.etal.Alignedmultilayeredelectrospunscaffoldsforrotatorcufftendon
structuresforfunctionalalignmentandguidedorientationofcells.Biomaterials tissueengineering.ActaBiomaterialia24,117–126(2015).
69,158–164(2015). 48. Zhu,C.,Pongkitwitoon,S.,Qiu,J.,Thomopoulos,S.&Xia,Y.Designandfabri-
15. Kim,J.,Kim,H.N.,Lang,Y.&Pandit,A.Biologicallyinspiredmicro-andnanoen- cation of a hierarchically structured scaffold for tendon‐to‐bone repair. Adv.
gineering systems for functional and complex tissues. Tissue Eng. Part A 20, Mater.30,1707306(2018).
2127–2130(2014). 49. Jayasree,A.etal.Bioengineeredbraidedmicro–nano(multiscale)ﬁbrousscaf-
16. Mitrousis,N.,Fokina,A.&Shoichet,M.S.Biomaterialsforcelltransplantation.Nat. foldsfortendonreconstruction.ACSBiomater.Sci.Eng.5,1476–1486(2019).
Rev.Mater.3,441–456(2018). 50. Guo, L. J. Nanoimprint lithography: methods and material requirements. Adv.
17. Kim,J.etal.Multiscalepatternedtransplantablestemcellpatchesforbonetissue Mater.19,495–513(2007).
regeneration.Biomaterials35,9058–9067(2014). 51. Park, S. et al. Controlled extracellular topographical and chemical cues for
18. Kim,J.etal.Engineeringstructuresandfunctionsofmesenchymalstemcellsby accelerationofneuronaldevelopment.J.Ind.Eng.Chem.61,65–70(2018).
suspendedlarge-areagraphenenanopatterns.2DMater.3,035013(2016). 52. Jeon,H.,Lee,J.,Lee,H.&Kim,G.H.NanostructuredsurfaceofelectrospunPCL/
19. Ma,P.X.Biomimeticmaterialsfortissueengineering.Adv.DrugDeliv.Rev.60, dECM ﬁbres treated with oxygen plasma for tissue engineering. Rsc Adv. 6,
184–198(2008). 32887–32896(2016).
20. Wegst,U.G.,Bai,H.,Saiz,E.,Tomsia,A.P.&Ritchie,R.O.Bioinspiredstructural 53. Hasirci,V.,Tezcaner,A.,Hasirci,N.&Suzer,S.Oxygenplasmamodiﬁcationofpoly
materials.Nat.Mater.14,23(2015). (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) ﬁlm surfaces for tissue engineering
21. Kim,W.,Park,S.,Gwon,Y.,Kim,H.N.&Kim,J.Heatandpressure-assistedsoft purposes.J.Appl.Polym.Sci.87,1285–1289(2003).
lithographyforsize-tunablenanoscalestructures.MaterialsLetters299,130064 54. Kim, Y. & Kim, G. Highly roughened polycaprolactone surfaces using oxygen
(2021). plasma-etchingandinvitromineralizationforbonetissueregeneration:Fabri-
22. Bae,W.G.etal.25thanniversaryarticle:scalablemultiscalepatternedstructures cation,characterization,andcellularactivities.ColloidsSurf.B-Biointerfaces125,
inspiredbynature:theroleofhierarchy.Adv.Mater.26,675–700(2014). 181–189(2015).
23. Agarwal,S.,Wendorff,J.H.&Greiner,A.Useofelectrospinningtechniquefor 55. Morent, R., De Geyter, N., Desmet, T., Dubruel, P. & Leys, C. Plasma surface
biomedicalapplications.Polymer49,5603–5621(2008). modiﬁcation of biodegradable polymers: a review. Plasma Process. Polym. 8,
24. Liang,D.,Hsiao,B.S.&Chu,B.Functionalelectrospunnanoﬁbrousscaffoldsfor 171–190(2011).
biomedicalapplications.Adv.DrugDeliv.Rev.59,1392–1412(2007). 56. Ghorbani, F. & Zamanian, A. Oxygen-plasma treatment-induced surface engi-
25. Pina,S.,Oliveira,J.M.&Reis,R.L.Natural‐basednanocompositesforbonetissue neering of biomimetic polyurethane nanoﬁbrous scaffolds for gelatin-heparin
engineering and regenerative medicine: a review. Adv. Mater. 27, 1143–1169 immobilization.E-Polym.18,275–285(2018).
(2015). 57. Roh,H.-S.etal.AdditionofMgOnanoparticlesandplasmasurfacetreatmentof
26. Kim, H. N. et al. Nanotopography-guided tissue engineering and regenerative three-dimensional printed polycaprolactone/hydroxyapatite scaffolds for
medicine.Adv.DrugDeliv.Rev.65,536–558(2013). improvingboneregeneration.Mater.Sci.Eng.:C.74,525–535(2017).
27. Kim,W.etal.Tendon-inspirednanotopographicscaffoldfortissueregeneration 58. Shah,A.,Shah,S.,Mani,G.,Wenke,J.&Agrawal,M.Endothelialcellbehaviouron
inrotatorcuffinjuries.ACSOmega5,13913–13925(2020). gas‐plasma‐treatedPLAsurfaces:therolesofsurfacechemistryandroughness.J.
28. Kleiner,D.M.Humantendons:anatomy,physiologyandpathology.J.Athl.Train. TissueEng.Regen.Med.5,301–312(2011).
33,185(1998). 59. Hanson,A.D.,Wall,M.E.,Pourdeyhimi,B.&Loboa,E.G.Effectsofoxygenplasma
29. Kannus,P.Structureofthetendonconnectivetissue.Scand.J.Med.Sci.sports10, treatmentonadipose-derivedhumanmesenchymalstemcelladherencetopoly
312–320(2000). (L-lacticacid)scaffolds.J.Biomater.Sci.-Polym.Ed.18,1387–1400(2007).
30. Trantidou,T.,Elani,Y.,Parsons,E.&Ces,O.Hydrophilicsurfacemodiﬁcationof 60. Bagherzadeh,R.,Latiﬁ,M.&Kong,L.X.Three-dimensionalporestructureanalysis
PDMSfordropletmicroﬂuidicsusingasimple,quick,androbustmethodviaPVA of polycaprolactone nano-microﬁbrous scaffolds using theoretical and experi-
deposition.Microsyst.nanoengineering3,1–9(2017). mentalapproaches.J.Biomed.Mater.Res.PartA102,903–910(2014).
31. Hegemann,D.etal.Suppressionofhydrophobicrecoverybyplasmapolymer 61. Keivani,F.etal.Engineeredelectrospunpoly(caprolactone)/polycaprolactone-g-
ﬁlmswithverticalchemicalgradients.Langmuir32,651–654(2016). hydroxyapatitenano-ﬁbrousscaffoldpromoteshumanﬁbroblastsadhesionand
32. Jiang, L. et al. Surface wettability of oxygen plasma treated porous silicon. J. proliferation.Mater.Sci.Eng.C.-Mater.Biol.Appl.68,78–88(2016).
Nanomater.2014,8(2014). 62. Sun,Y.Y.etal.Asyntheticbridgingpatchofmodiﬁedco-electrospundualnano-
33. Qin,T.-W.etal.Effectofmechanicalstimulationonbonemarrowstromalcell- scaffoldsformassiverotatorcufftear.J.Mater.Chem.B4,7259–7269(2016).
seededtendonsliceconstructs:apotentialengineeredtendonpatchforrotator 63. Lipner,J.etal.Invivoevaluationofadipose-derivedstromalcellsdeliveredwitha
cuffrepair.Biomaterials51,43–50(2015). nanoﬁberscaffoldfortendon-to-bonerepair.TissueEng.PartA21,2766–2774
34. Smith,R.etal.Theresponseoftenocytestocommercialscaffoldsusedforrotator (2015).
cuffrepair.eCellsandMaterialsJ.30,107–118(2016). 64. Domingos, M. et al. Improved osteoblast cell afﬁnity on plasma-modiﬁed 3-D
35. Mahmoudi,M.etal.Multiscaletechnologiesfortreatmentofischemiccardio- extrudedPCLscaffolds.ActaBiomaterialia9,5997–6005(2013).
myopathy.Nat.Nanotechnol.12,845(2017). 65. Zhao,S.etal.Ahierarchical,stretchableandstiffﬁbrousbiotemplateengineered
36. Teo, A. J. et al. Polymeric biomaterials for medical implants and devices. ACS usingstagger-electrospinningforaugmentationofrotatorcufftendon-healing.J.
Biomater.Sci.Eng.2,454–472(2016). Mater.Chem.B3,990–1000(2015).
37. Garg, T. & Goyal, A. K. Biomaterial-based scaffolds–current status and future 66. Chainani, A. et al. Multilayered electrospun scaffolds for tendon tissue engi-
directions.ExpertOpin.DrugDeliv.11,767–789(2014). neering.TissueEng.PartA19,2594–2604(2013).
38. Baik,S.etal.Bioinspiredadhesivearchitectures:fromskinpatchtointegrated 67. Chu, P.K.,Chen,J.,Wang,L.&Huang, N.Plasma-surface modiﬁcationofbio-
bioelectronics.Adv.Mater.31,1803309(2019). materials.Mater.Sci.Eng.:R:Rep.36,143–206(2002).
39. Middleton,J.C.&Tipton,A.J.Syntheticbiodegradablepolymersasorthopedic 68. Peach,M.S.etal.Engineeredstemcellnichematricesforrotatorcufftendon
devices.Biomaterials21,2335–2346(2000). regenerativeengineering.PLoSONE12,e0174789(2017).
npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52  PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute

NEW PAGE

W.Kimetal.
13
69. Sevivas,N.etal.Mesenchymalstemcellsecretomeimprovestendoncellviability COMPETINGINTERESTS
invitroandtendon-bonehealinginvivowhenatissueengineeringstrategyis J.K. is named on patents that describe the use of multiscale platforms as the
usedinaratmodelofchronicmassiverotatorcufftear.Am.J.SportsMed.46, scaffolds for tissue regeneration. The authors declare the following ﬁnancial
449–459(2018). interests and personal relationships which may be considered as potential
70. Kim,Y.S.,Lee,H.J.,Ok,J.H.,Park,J.S.&Kim,D.W.Survivorshipofimplanted competinginterest.
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells in acute rotator cuff tear. J.
ShoulderElb.Surg.22,1037–1045(2013).
71. Cook,J.,Feller,J.,Bonar,S.&Khan,K.Abnormaltenocytemorphologyismore ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
prevalentthancollagendisruptioninasymptomaticathletes’patellartendons.J.
Orthop.Res.22,334–338(2004). Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
availableathttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-021-00162-y.
72. Fearon,A.,Dahlstrom,J.E.,Twin,J.,Cook,J.&Scott,A.TheBonarscorerevisited:
region of evaluation signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the standardized assessment of
tendondegeneration.J.Sci.Med.Sport17,346–350(2014). CorrespondenceandrequestsformaterialsshouldbeaddressedtoMyung-SunKim
orJanghoKim.
73. Khan,K.M.,Cook,J.L.,Bonar,F.,Harcourt,P.&Åstrom,M.Histopathologyof
commontendinopathies.SportsMed.27,393–408(1999).
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Publisher’snoteSpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaims
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) inpublishedmapsandinstitutionalafﬁliations.
grants funded by the Korean government (NRF-2016M3A9B4919353, NRF-
2019R1I1A3A0106345, NRF-2019M3A9H1103737, and NRF-2021M3E5E703044011).
Thisworkwasalsosupportedbyagrant(714002-7)fromtheAgriculturalRobotics
and Automation Research Center through the Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
ResearchCenterSupportProgram,MinistryofAgriculture,FoodandRuralAffairs.The Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
authorsaregratefultotheCenterforResearchFacilitiesattheChonnamNational adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
Universityfortheirassistanceintheanalysisofthepropertiesofallscaffolds(FE-SEM, appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreative
FT-IR,XPS). Commonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdparty
materialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicense,unless
indicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthe
AUTHORCONTRIBUTIONS article’sCreativeCommonslicenseandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutory
J.K.andM.S.K.supervisedtheprojectandﬁnalapproval.W.K.,Y.G.,Y.K.K.,S.P.,S.J.K.,H. regulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtainpermissiondirectly
K.P,M.S.K.,andJ.K.performedsubstantialcontributionstoconceptionanddesign, fromthecopyrightholder.Toviewacopyofthislicense,visithttp://creativecommons.
acquisitionofthedataoranalysisandinterpretationofthedata.W.K.,Y.G.,Y.K.K.,S.P., org/licenses/by/4.0/.
andH.K.P.carriedouttheexperiments.W.K.,Y.G.,Y.K.K.,andS.P.analyzedtheresults
ontheexperiments.W.K.,Y.G.,Y.K.K.,S.P.,S.J.K.,M.S.K.,andJ.K.discussedtheresults
anddataindetail.W.K.,Y.G.,Y.K.K.,S.P.,M.S.K.,andJ.K.wrotethemanuscript. ©TheAuthor(s)2021
PublishedinpartnershipwiththeAustralianRegenerativeMedicineInstitute npjRegenerativeMedicine(2021)   52 

NEW PAGE